Book the First--Recalled to LifeIThe PeriodIt was the best of times, it was the worst of times,it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness,it was the epoch of belief, it was the epoch of incredulity,it was the season of Light, it was the season of Darkness,it was the spring of hope, it was the winter of despair,we had everything before us, we had nothing before us,we were all going direct to Heaven, we were all going directthe other way--in short, the period was so far like the presentperiod, that some of its noisiest authorities insisted on itsbeing received, for good or for evil, in the superlative degreeof comparison only.There were a king with a large jaw and a queen with a plain face,on the throne of England; there were a king with a large jaw anda queen with a fair face, on the throne of France.  In bothcountries it was clearer than crystal to the lords of the Statepreserves of loaves and fishes, that things in general weresettled for ever.It was the year of Our Lord one thousand seven hundred andseventy-five.  Spiritual revelations were conceded to England atthat favoured period, as at this.  Mrs. Southcott had recentlyattained her five-and-twentieth blessed birthday, of whom aprophetic private in the Life Guards had heralded the sublimeappearance by announcing that arrangements were made for theswallowing up of London and Westminster.  Even the Cock-laneghost had been laid only a round dozen of years, after rappingout its messages, as the spirits of this very year last past(supernaturally deficient in originality) rapped out theirs.Mere messages in the earthly order of events had lately come tothe English Crown and People, from a congress of British subjectsin America:  which, strange to relate, have proved more importantto the human race than any communications yet received throughany of the chickens of the Cock-lane brood.France, less favoured on the whole as to matters spiritual thanher sister of the shield and trident, rolled with exceedingsmoothness down hill, making paper money and spending it.Under the guidance of her Christian pastors, she entertainedherself, besides, with such humane achievements as sentencinga youth to have his hands cut off, his tongue torn out withpincers, and his body burned alive, because he had not kneeleddown in the rain to do honour to a dirty procession of monkswhich passed within his view, at a distance of some fifty orsixty yards.  It is likely enough that, rooted in the woods ofFrance and Norway, there were growing trees, when that suffererwas put to death, already marked by the Woodman, Fate, to comedown and be sawn into boards, to make a certain movable frameworkwith a sack and a knife in it, terrible in history.  It is likelyenough that in the rough outhouses of some tillers of the heavylands adjacent to Paris, there were sheltered from the weatherthat very day, rude carts, bespattered with rustic mire, snuffedabout by pigs, and roosted in by poultry, which the Farmer, Death,had already set apart to be his tumbrils of the Revolution.But that Woodman and that Farmer, though they work unceasingly,work silently, and no one heard them as they went about withmuffled tread:  the rather, forasmuch as to entertain any suspicionthat they were awake, was to be atheistical and traitorous.In England, there was scarcely an amount of order and protectionto justify much national boasting.  Daring burglaries by armedmen, and highway robberies, took place in the capital itselfevery night; families were publicly cautioned not to go out oftown without removing their furniture to upholsterers' warehousesfor security; the highwayman in the dark was a City tradesman inthe light, and, being recognised and challenged by his fellow-tradesman whom he stopped in his character of "the Captain,"gallantly shot him through the head and rode away; the mail waswaylaid by seven robbers, and the guard shot three dead, and thengot shot dead himself by the other four, "in consequence of thefailure of his ammunition:" after which the mail was robbed inpeace; that magnificent potentate, the Lord Mayor of London, wasmade to stand and deliver on Turnham Green, by one highwayman,who despoiled the illustrious creature in sight of all hisretinue; prisoners in London gaols fought battles with theirturnkeys, and the majesty of the law fired blunderbusses in amongthem, loaded with rounds of shot and ball; thieves snipped offdiamond crosses from the necks of noble lords at Courtdrawing-rooms; musketeers went into St. Giles's, to search forcontraband goods, and the mob fired on the musketeers, and themusketeers fired on the mob, and nobody thought any of theseoccurrences much out of the common way.  In the midst of them,the hangman, ever busy and ever worse than useless, was inconstant requisition; now, stringing up long rows of miscellaneouscriminals; now, hanging a housebreaker on Saturday who had beentaken on Tuesday; now, burning people in the hand at Newgate bythe dozen, and now burning pamphlets at the door of Westminster Hall;to-day, taking the life of an atrocious murderer, and to-morrow of awretched pilferer who had robbed a farmer's boy of sixpence.All these things, and a thousand like them, came to pass inand close upon the dear old year one thousand seven hundredand seventy-five.  Environed by them, while the Woodman and theFarmer worked unheeded, those two of the large jaws, and thoseother two of the plain and the fair faces, trod with stir enough,and carried their divine rights with a high hand.  Thus did theyear one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five conduct theirGreatnesses, and myriads of small creatures--the creatures of thischronicle among the rest--along the roads that lay before them.IIThe MailIt was the Dover road that lay, on a Friday night late in November,before the first of the persons with whom this history has business.The Dover road lay, as to him, beyond the Dover mail, as it lumberedup Shooter's Hill.  He walked up hill in the mire by the side of themail, as the rest of the passengers did; not because they had theleast relish for walking exercise, under the circumstances, butbecause the hill, and the harness, and the mud, and the mail, wereall so heavy, that the horses had three times already come to a stop,besides once drawing the coach across the road, with the mutinousintent of taking it back to Blackheath.  Reins and whip and coachmanand guard, however, in combination, had read that article of warwhich forbade a purpose otherwise strongly in favour of the argument,that some brute animals are endued with Reason; and the team hadcapitulated and returned to their duty.With drooping heads and tremulous tails, they mashed their waythrough the thick mud, floundering and stumbling between whiles,as if they were falling to pieces at the larger joints.  As oftenas the driver rested them and brought them to a stand, with awary "Wo-ho! so-ho-then!" the near leader violently shook hishead and everything upon it--like an unusually emphatic horse,denying that the coach could be got up the hill.  Whenever theleader made this rattle, the passenger started, as a nervouspassenger might, and was disturbed in mind.There was a steaming mist in all the hollows, and it had roamedin its forlornness up the hill, like an evil spirit, seeking restand finding none.  A clammy and intensely cold mist, it made itsslow way through the air in ripples that visibly followed andoverspread one another, as the waves of an unwholesome sea mightdo.  It was dense enough to shut out everything from the light ofthe coach-lamps but these its own workings, and a few yards ofroad; and the reek of the labouring horses steamed into it, as ifthey had made it all.Two other passengers, besides the one, were plodding up the hillby the side of the mail.  All three were wrapped to the cheekbonesand over the ears, and wore jack-boots.  Not one of the threecould have said, from anything he saw, what either of the othertwo was like; and each was hidden under almost as many wrappersfrom the eyes of the mind, as from the eyes of the body, of histwo companions.  In those days, travellers were very shy of beingconfidential on a short notice, for anybody on the road might bea robber or in league with robbers.  As to the latter, when everyposting-house and ale-house could produce somebody in "the Captain's"pay, ranging from the landlord to the lowest stable non-descript,it was the likeliest thing upon the cards.  So the guard of theDover mail thought to himself, that Friday night in November, onethousand seven hundred and seventy-five, lumbering up Shooter'sHill, as he stood on his own particular perch behind the mail,beating his feet, and keeping an eye and a hand on the arm-chestbefore him, where a loaded blunderbuss lay at the top of six oreight loaded horse-pistols, deposited on a substratum of cutlass.The Dover mail was in its usual genial position that the guardsuspected the passengers, the passengers suspected one anotherand the guard, they all suspected everybody else, and the coachmanwas sure of nothing but the horses; as to which cattle he couldwith a clear conscience have taken his oath on the two Testamentsthat they were not fit for the journey."Wo-ho!" said the coachman.  "So, then!  One more pull and you'reat the top and be damned to you, for I have had trouble enough toget you to it!--Joe!""Halloa!" the guard replied."What o'clock do you make it, Joe?""Ten minutes, good, past eleven.""My blood!" ejaculated the vexed coachman, "and not atop ofShooter's yet!  Tst!  Yah!  Get on with you!"The emphatic horse, cut short by the whip in a most decidednegative, made a decided scramble for it, and the three otherhorses followed suit.  Once more, the Dover mail struggled on,with the jack-boots of its passengers squashing along by itsside.  They had stopped when the coach stopped, and they keptclose company with it.  If any one of the three had had thehardihood to propose to another to walk on a little ahead intothe mist and darkness, he would have put himself in a fair wayof getting shot instantly as a highwayman.The last burst carried the mail to the summit of the hill.The horses stopped to breathe again, and the guard got down toskid the wheel for the descent, and open the coach-door to letthe passengers in."Tst!  Joe!" cried the coachman in a warning voice, looking downfrom his box."What do you say, Tom?"They both listened."I say a horse at a canter coming up, Joe.""_I_ say a horse at a gallop, Tom," returned the guard, leavinghis hold of the door, and mounting nimbly to his place."Gentlemen!  In the king's name, all of you!"With this hurried adjuration, he cocked his blunderbuss, andstood on the offensive.The passenger booked by this history, was on the coach-step,getting in; the two other passengers were close behind him, andabout to follow.  He remained on the step, half in the coach andhalf out of; they remained in the road below him.  They alllooked from the coachman to the guard, and from the guard to thecoachman, and listened.  The coachman looked back and the guardlooked back, and even the emphatic leader pricked up his ears andlooked back, without contradicting.The stillness consequent on the cessation of the rumbling andlabouring of the coach, added to the stillness of the night, madeit very quiet indeed.  The panting of the horses communicated atremulous motion to the coach, as if it were in a state ofagitation.  The hearts of the passengers beat loud enough perhapsto be heard; but at any rate, the quiet pause was audiblyexpressive of people out of breath, and holding the breath, andhaving the pulses quickened by expectation.The sound of a horse at a gallop came fast and furiously up the hill."So-ho!" the guard sang out, as loud as he could roar.  "Yo there!Stand!  I shall fire!"The pace was suddenly checked, and, with much splashing and floundering,a man's voice called from the mist, "Is that the Dover mail?""Never you mind what it is!" the guard retorted.  "What are you?""_Is_ that the Dover mail?""Why do you want to know?""I want a passenger, if it is.""What passenger?""Mr. Jarvis Lorry."Our booked passenger showed in a moment that it was his name.The guard, the coachman, and the two other passengers eyed himdistrustfully."Keep where you are," the guard called to the voice in the mist,"because, if I should make a mistake, it could never be set rightin your lifetime.  Gentleman of the name of Lorry answer straight.""What is the matter?" asked the passenger, then, with mildlyquavering speech.  "Who wants me?  Is it Jerry?"("I don't like Jerry's voice, if it is Jerry," growled the guardto himself.  "He's hoarser than suits me, is Jerry.")"Yes, Mr. Lorry.""What is the matter?""A despatch sent after you from over yonder.  T. and Co.""I know this messenger, guard," said Mr. Lorry, getting down intothe road--assisted from behind more swiftly than politely by theother two passengers, who immediately scrambled into the coach,shut the door, and pulled up the window.  "He may come close;there's nothing wrong.""I hope there ain't, but I can't make so 'Nation sure of that,"said the guard, in gruff soliloquy.  "Hallo you!""Well!  And hallo you!" said Jerry, more hoarsely than before."Come on at a footpace! d'ye mind me?  And if you've got holstersto that saddle o' yourn, don't let me see your hand go nigh 'em.For I'm a devil at a quick mistake, and when I make one it takesthe form of Lead.  So now let's look at you."The figures of a horse and rider came slowly through the eddyingmist, and came to the side of the mail, where the passenger stood.The rider stooped, and, casting up his eyes at the guard, handedthe passenger a small folded paper.  The rider's horse was blown,and both horse and rider were covered with mud, from the hoofs ofthe horse to the hat of the man."Guard!" said the passenger, in a tone of quiet business confidence.The watchful guard, with his right hand at the stock of his raisedblunderbuss, his left at the barrel, and his eye on the horseman,answered curtly, "Sir.""There is nothing to apprehend.  I belong to Tellson's Bank.You must know Tellson's Bank in London.  I am going to Parison business.  A crown to drink.  I may read this?""If so be as you're quick, sir."He opened it in the light of the coach-lamp on that side,and read--first to himself and then aloud:  "`Wait at Dover forMam'selle.' It's not long, you see, guard.  Jerry, say that myanswer was, RECALLED TO LIFE."Jerry started in his saddle.  "That's a Blazing strange answer, too,"said he, at his hoarsest."Take that message back, and they will know that I received this,as well as if I wrote.  Make the best of your way.  Good night."With those words the passenger opened the coach-door and got in;not at all assisted by his fellow-passengers, who hadexpeditiously secreted their watches and purses in their boots,and were now making a general pretence of being asleep.  With nomore definite purpose than to escape the hazard of originatingany other kind of action.The coach lumbered on again, with heavier wreaths of mist closinground it as it began the descent.  The guard soon replaced hisblunderbuss in his arm-chest, and, having looked to the rest of itscontents, and having looked to the supplementary pistols that he worein his belt, looked to a smaller chest beneath his seat, in whichthere were a few smith's tools, a couple of torches, and a tinder-box.For he was furnished with that completeness that if the coach-lampshad been blown and stormed out, which did occasionally happen, he hadonly to shut himself up inside, keep the flint and steel sparks welloff the straw, and get a light with tolerable safety and ease (if hewere lucky) in five minutes."Tom!" softly over the coach roof."Hallo, Joe.""Did you hear the message?""I did, Joe.""What did you make of it, Tom?""Nothing at all, Joe.""That's a coincidence, too," the guard mused, "for I made thesame of it myself."Jerry, left alone in the mist and darkness, dismounted meanwhile,not only to ease his spent horse, but to wipe the mud from hisface, and shake the wet out of his hat-brim, which might becapable of holding about half a gallon.  After standing with thebridle over his heavily-splashed arm, until the wheels of themail were no longer within hearing and the night was quite stillagain, he turned to walk down the hill."After that there gallop from Temple Bar, old lady, I won't trustyour fore-legs till I get you on the level," said this hoarsemessenger, glancing at his mare.  "`Recalled to life.'  That's aBlazing strange message.  Much of that wouldn't do for you, Jerry!I say, Jerry!  You'd be in a Blazing bad way, if recalling to lifewas to come into fashion, Jerry!"IIIThe Night ShadowsA wonderful fact to reflect upon, that every human creature isconstituted to be that profound secret and mystery to every other.A solemn consideration, when I enter a great city by night, thatevery one of those darkly clustered houses encloses its own secret;that every room in every one of them encloses its own secret; thatevery beating heart in the hundreds of thousands of breasts there,is, in some of its imaginings, a secret to the heart nearest it!Something of the awfulness, even of Death itself, is referable tothis.  No more can I turn the leaves of this dear book that I loved,and vainly hope in time to read it all.  No more can I look into thedepths of this unfathomable water, wherein, as momentary lightsglanced into it, I have had glimpses of buried treasure and otherthings submerged.  It was appointed that the book should shut witha spring, for ever and for ever, when I had read but a page.  It wasappointed that the water should be locked in an eternal frost, whenthe light was playing on its surface, and I stood in ignorance on theshore.  My friend is dead, my neighbour is dead, my love, the darlingof my soul, is dead; it is the inexorable consolidation andperpetuation of the secret that was always in that individuality,and which I shall carry in mine to my life's end.  In any of theburial-places of this city through which I pass, is there a sleepermore inscrutable than its busy inhabitants are, in their innermostpersonality, to me, or than I am to them?As to this, his natural and not to be alienated inheritance,the messenger on horseback had exactly the same possessions asthe King, the first Minister of State, or the richest merchantin London.  So with the three passengers shut up in the narrowcompass of one lumbering old mail coach; they were mysteries toone another, as complete as if each had been in his own coach andsix, or his own coach and sixty, with the breadth of a countybetween him and the next.The messenger rode back at an easy trot, stopping pretty often atale-houses by the way to drink, but evincing a tendency to keep hisown counsel, and to keep his hat cocked over his eyes.  He had eyesthat assorted very well with that decoration, being of a surfaceblack, with no depth in the colour or form, and much too neartogether--as if they were afraid of being found out in something,singly, if they kept too far apart.  They had a sinister expression,under an old cocked-hat like a three-cornered spittoon, and over agreat muffler for the chin and throat, which descended nearly to thewearer's knees.  When he stopped for drink, he moved this mufflerwith his left hand, only while he poured his liquor in with hisright; as soon as that was done, he muffled again."No, Jerry, no!" said the messenger, harping on one theme as he rode."It wouldn't do for you, Jerry.  Jerry, you honest tradesman, itwouldn't suit _your_ line of business!  Recalled--!  Bust me if Idon't think he'd been a drinking!"His message perplexed his mind to that degree that he was fain,several times, to take off his hat to scratch his head.  Except onthe crown, which was raggedly bald, he had stiff, black hair,standing jaggedly all over it, and growing down hill almost to hisbroad, blunt nose.  It was so like Smith's work, so much more likethe top of a strongly spiked wall than a head of hair, that the bestof players at leap-frog might have declined him, as the mostdangerous man in the world to go over.While he trotted back with the message he was to deliver to the nightwatchman in his box at the door of Tellson's Bank, by Temple Bar, whowas to deliver it to greater authorities within, the shadows of thenight took such shapes to him as arose out of the message, and tooksuch shapes to the mare as arose out of _her_ private topics ofuneasiness.  They seemed to be numerous, for she shied at everyshadow on the road.What time, the mail-coach lumbered, jolted, rattled, and bumped uponits tedious way, with its three fellow-inscrutables inside.  To whom,likewise, the shadows of the night revealed themselves, in the formstheir dozing eyes and wandering thoughts suggested.Tellson's Bank had a run upon it in the mail.  As the bank passenger--with an arm drawn through the leathern strap, which did what lay init to keep him from pounding against the next passenger, and drivinghim into his corner, whenever the coach got a special jolt--nodded inhis place, with half-shut eyes, the little coach-windows, and thecoach-lamp dimly gleaming through them, and the bulky bundle ofopposite passenger, became the bank, and did a great stroke of business.The rattle of the harness was the chink of money, and more draftswere honoured in five minutes than even Tellson's, with all itsforeign and home connection, ever paid in thrice the time.  Then thestrong-rooms underground, at Tellson's, with such of their valuablestores and secrets as were known to the passenger (and it was not alittle that he knew about them), opened before him, and he went inamong them with the great keys and the feebly-burning candle, andfound them safe, and strong, and sound, and still, just as he hadlast seen them.But, though the bank was almost always with him, and though the coach(in a confused way, like the presence of pain under an opiate) wasalways with him, there was another current of impression that neverceased to run, all through the night.  He was on his way to dig someone out of a grave.Now, which of the multitude of faces that showed themselves beforehim was the true face of the buried person, the shadows of the nightdid not indicate; but they were all the faces of a man of five-and-forty by years, and they differed principally in the passions theyexpressed, and in the ghastliness of their worn and wasted state.Pride, contempt, defiance, stubbornness, submission, lamentation,succeeded one another; so did varieties of sunken cheek, cadaverouscolour, emaciated hands and figures.  But the face was in the mainone face, and every head was prematurely white.  A hundred times thedozing passenger inquired of this spectre:"Buried how long?"The answer was always the same:  "Almost eighteen years.""You had abandoned all hope of being dug out?""Long ago.""You know that you are recalled to life?""They tell me so.""I hope you care to live?""I can't say.""Shall I show her to you?  Will you come and see her?"The answers to this question were various and contradictory.Sometimes the broken reply was, "Wait!  It would kill me if I sawher too soon."  Sometimes, it was given in a tender rain of tears,and then it was, "Take me to her."  Sometimes it was staring andbewildered, and then it was, "I don't know her.  I don't understand."After such imaginary discourse, the passenger in his fancy would dig,and dig, dig--now with a spade, now with a great key, now with hishands--to dig this wretched creature out.  Got out at last, withearth hanging about his face and hair, he would suddenly fan away todust.  The passenger would then start to himself, and lower thewindow, to get the reality of mist and rain on his cheek.Yet even when his eyes were opened on the mist and rain, on themoving patch of light from the lamps, and the hedge at the roadsideretreating by jerks, the night shadows outside the coach would fallinto the train of the night shadows within.  The real Banking-houseby Temple Bar, the real business of the past day, the real strongrooms, the real express sent after him, and the real message returned,would all be there.  Out of the midst of them, the ghostly face wouldrise, and he would accost it again."Buried how long?""Almost eighteen years.""I hope you care to live?""I can't say."Dig--dig--dig--until an impatient movement from one of the twopassengers would admonish him to pull up the window, draw his armsecurely through the leathern strap, and speculate upon the twoslumbering forms, until his mind lost its hold of them, and theyagain slid away into the bank and the grave."Buried how long?""Almost eighteen years.""You had abandoned all hope of being dug out?""Long ago."The words were still in his hearing as just spoken--distinctly in hishearing as ever spoken words had been in his life--when the wearypassenger started to the consciousness of daylight, and found thatthe shadows of the night were gone.He lowered the window, and looked out at the rising sun.  There was aridge of ploughed land, with a plough upon it where it had been leftlast night when the horses were unyoked; beyond, a quiet coppice-wood,in which many leaves of burning red and golden yellow still remainedupon the trees.  Though the earth was cold and wet, the sky wasclear, and the sun rose bright, placid, and beautiful."Eighteen years!" said the passenger, looking at the sun."Gracious Creator of day!  To be buried alive for eighteen years!"IVThe PreparationWhen the mail got successfully to Dover, in the course of theforenoon, the head drawer at the Royal George Hotel opened thecoach-door as his custom was.  He did it with some flourish ofceremony, for a mail journey from London in winter was an achievementto congratulate an adventurous traveller upon.By that time, there was only one adventurous traveller left becongratulated:  for the two others had been set down at theirrespective roadside destinations.  The mildewy inside of the coach,with its damp and dirty straw, its disagreeable smell, and itsobscurity, was rather like a larger dog-kennel.  Mr. Lorry, thepassenger, shaking himself out of it in chains of straw, a tangle ofshaggy wrapper, flapping hat, and muddy legs, was rather like alarger sort of dog."There will be a packet to Calais, tomorrow, drawer?""Yes, sir, if the weather holds and the wind sets tolerable fair.The tide will serve pretty nicely at about two in the afternoon,sir.  Bed, sir?""I shall not go to bed till night; but I want a bedroom, and a barber.""And then breakfast, sir?  Yes, sir.  That way, sir, if you please.Show Concord!  Gentleman's valise and hot water to Concord.  Pull offgentleman's boots in Concord.  (You will find a fine sea-coal fire,sir.)  Fetch barber to Concord.  Stir about there, now, for Concord!"The Concord bed-chamber being always assigned to a passenger by themail, and passengers by the mail being always heavily wrapped up fromhead to foot, the room had the odd interest for the establishment ofthe Royal George, that although but one kind of man was seen to gointo it, all kinds and varieties of men came out of it.  Consequently,another drawer, and two porters, and several maids and the landlady,were all loitering by accident at various points of the road betweenthe Concord and the coffee-room, when a gentleman of sixty, formallydressed in a brown suit of clothes, pretty well worn, but very wellkept, with large square cuffs and large flaps to the pockets, passedalong on his way to his breakfast.The coffee-room had no other occupant, that forenoon, than thegentleman in brown.  His breakfast-table was drawn before the fire,and as he sat, with its light shining on him, waiting for the meal,he sat so still, that he might have been sitting for his portrait.Very orderly and methodical he looked, with a hand on each knee, anda loud watch ticking a sonorous sermon under his flapped waist-coat,as though it pitted its gravity and longevity against the levity andevanescence of the brisk fire.  He had a good leg, and was a littlevain of it, for his brown stockings fitted sleek and close, and wereof a fine texture; his shoes and buckles, too, though plain, weretrim.  He wore an odd little sleek crisp flaxen wig, setting veryclose to his head:  which wig, it is to be presumed, was made of hair,but which looked far more as though it were spun from filaments ofsilk or glass.  His linen, though not of a fineness in accordancewith his stockings, was as white as the tops of the waves that brokeupon the neighbouring beach, or the specks of sail that glinted inthe sunlight far at sea.  A face habitually suppressed and quieted,was still lighted up under the quaint wig by a pair of moist brighteyes that it must have cost their owner, in years gone by, some painsto drill to the composed and reserved expression of Tellson's Bank.He had a healthy colour in his cheeks, and his face, though lined,bore few traces of anxiety.  But, perhaps the confidential bachelorclerks in Tellson's Bank were principally occupied with the cares ofother people; and perhaps second-hand cares, like second-handclothes, come easily off and on.Completing his resemblance to a man who was sitting for his portrait,Mr. Lorry dropped off to sleep.  The arrival of his breakfast rousedhim, and he said to the drawer, as he moved his chair to it:"I wish accommodation prepared for a young lady who may come here atany time to-day.  She may ask for Mr. Jarvis Lorry, or she may onlyask for a gentleman from Tellson's Bank.  Please to let me know.""Yes, sir.  Tellson's Bank in London, sir?""Yes.""Yes, sir.  We have oftentimes the honour to entertain your gentlemenin their travelling backwards and forwards betwixt London and Paris,sir.  A vast deal of travelling, sir, in Tellson and Company's House.""Yes.  We are quite a French House, as well as an English one.""Yes, sir.  Not much in the habit of such travelling yourself,I think, sir?""Not of late years.  It is fifteen years since we--since I--camelast from France.""Indeed, sir?  That was before my time here, sir.  Before our people'stime here, sir.  The George was in other hands at that time, sir.""I believe so.""But I would hold a pretty wager, sir, that a House like Tellson andCompany was flourishing, a matter of fifty, not to speak of fifteenyears ago?""You might treble that, and say a hundred and fifty, yet not be farfrom the truth.""Indeed, sir!"Rounding his mouth and both his eyes, as he stepped backward from thetable, the waiter shifted his napkin from his right arm to his left,dropped into a comfortable attitude, and stood surveying the guestwhile he ate and drank, as from an observatory or watchtower.According to the immemorial usage of waiters in all ages.When Mr. Lorry had finished his breakfast, he went out for a strollon the beach.  The little narrow, crooked town of Dover hid itselfaway from the beach, and ran its head into the chalk cliffs, like amarine ostrich.  The beach was a desert of heaps of sea and stonestumbling wildly about, and the sea did what it liked, and what itliked was destruction.  It thundered at the town, and thundered atthe cliffs, and brought the coast down, madly.  The air among thehouses was of so strong a piscatory flavour that one might havesupposed sick fish went up to be dipped in it, as sick people wentdown to be dipped in the sea.  A little fishing was done in the port,and a quantity of strolling about by night, and looking seaward:particularly at those times when the tide made, and was near flood.Small tradesmen, who did no business whatever, sometimes unaccountablyrealised large fortunes, and it was remarkable that nobody in theneighbourhood could endure a lamplighter.As the day declined into the afternoon, and the air, which had beenat intervals clear enough to allow the French coast to be seen,became again charged with mist and vapour, Mr. Lorry's thoughtsseemed to cloud too.  When it was dark, and he sat before thecoffee-room fire, awaiting his dinner as he had awaited his breakfast,his mind was busily digging, digging, digging, in the live red coals.A bottle of good claret after dinner does a digger in the red coalsno harm, otherwise than as it has a tendency to throw him out ofwork.  Mr. Lorry had been idle a long time, and had just poured outhis last glassful of wine with as complete an appearance ofsatisfaction as is ever to be found in an elderly gentleman of afresh complexion who has got to the end of a bottle, when a rattlingof wheels came up the narrow street, and rumbled into the inn-yard.He set down his glass untouched.  "This is Mam'selle!" said he.In a very few minutes the waiter came in to announce that MissManette had arrived from London, and would be happy to see thegentleman from Tellson's."So soon?"Miss Manette had taken some refreshment on the road, and requirednone then, and was extremely anxious to see the gentleman fromTellson's immediately, if it suited his pleasure and convenience.The gentleman from Tellson's had nothing left for it but to empty hisglass with an air of stolid desperation, settle his odd little flaxenwig at the ears, and follow the waiter to Miss Manette's apartment.It was a large, dark room, furnished in a funereal manner with blackhorsehair, and loaded with heavy dark tables.  These had been oiledand oiled, until the two tall candles on the table in the middle ofthe room were gloomily reflected on every leaf; as if _they_ wereburied, in deep graves of black mahogany, and no light to speak ofcould be expected from them until they were dug out.The obscurity was so difficult to penetrate that Mr. Lorry,picking his way over the well-worn Turkey carpet, supposedMiss Manette to be, for the moment, in some adjacent room, until,having got past the two tall candles, he saw standing to receive himby the table between them and the fire, a young lady of not more thanseventeen, in a riding-cloak, and still holding her straw travelling-hat by its ribbon in her hand.  As his eyes rested on a short, slight,pretty figure, a quantity of golden hair, a pair of blue eyes thatmet his own with an inquiring look, and a forehead with a singularcapacity (remembering how young and smooth it was), of rifting andknitting itself into an expression that was not quite one of perplexity,or wonder, or alarm, or merely of a bright fixed attention, though itincluded all the four expressions--as his eyes rested on these things,a sudden vivid likeness passed before him, of a child whom he hadheld in his arms on the passage across that very Channel, one coldtime, when the hail drifted heavily and the sea ran high.  Thelikeness passed away, like a breath along the surface of the gauntpier-glass behind her, on the frame of which, a hospital processionof negro cupids, several headless and all cripples, were offeringblack baskets of Dead Sea fruit to black divinities of the femininegender--and he made his formal bow to Miss Manette."Pray take a seat, sir."  In a very clear and pleasant young voice;a little foreign in its accent, but a very little indeed."I kiss your hand, miss," said Mr. Lorry, with the manners of anearlier date, as he made his formal bow again, and took his seat."I received a letter from the Bank, sir, yesterday, informing me thatsome intelligence--or discovery--""The word is not material, miss; either word will do.""--respecting the small property of my poor father, whom I neversaw--so long dead--"Mr. Lorry moved in his chair, and cast a troubled look towards thehospital procession of negro cupids.  As if _they_ had any help foranybody in their absurd baskets!"--rendered it necessary that I should go to Paris, there tocommunicate with a gentleman of the Bank, so good as to be despatchedto Paris for the purpose.""Myself.""As I was prepared to hear, sir."She curtseyed to him (young ladies made curtseys in those days), witha pretty desire to convey to him that she felt how much older andwiser he was than she.  He made her another bow."I replied to the Bank, sir, that as it was considered necessary, bythose who know, and who are so kind as to advise me, that I should goto France, and that as I am an orphan and have no friend who could gowith me, I should esteem it highly if I might be permitted to placemyself, during the journey, under that worthy gentleman's protection.The gentleman had left London, but I think a messenger was sent afterhim to beg the favour of his waiting for me here.""I was happy," said Mr. Lorry, "to be entrusted with the charge.I shall be more happy to execute it.""Sir, I thank you indeed.  I thank you very gratefully.  It was toldme by the Bank that the gentleman would explain to me the details ofthe business, and that I must prepare myself to find them of asurprising nature.  I have done my best to prepare myself, and Inaturally have a strong and eager interest to know what they are.""Naturally," said Mr. Lorry.  "Yes--I--"After a pause, he added, again settling the crisp flaxen wig at the ears,"It is very difficult to begin."He did not begin, but, in his indecision, met her glance.  The youngforehead lifted itself into that singular expression--but it waspretty and characteristic, besides being singular--and she raisedher hand, as if with an involuntary action she caught at, or stayedsome passing shadow."Are you quite a stranger to me, sir?""Am I not?"  Mr. Lorry opened his hands, and extended them outwardswith an argumentative smile.Between the eyebrows and just over the little feminine nose, the lineof which was as delicate and fine as it was possible to be, theexpression deepened itself as she took her seat thoughtfully in thechair by which she had hitherto remained standing.  He watched her asshe mused, and the moment she raised her eyes again, went on:"In your adopted country, I presume, I cannot do better than addressyou as a young English lady, Miss Manette?""If you please, sir.""Miss Manette, I am a man of business.  I have a business charge toacquit myself of.  In your reception of it, don't heed me any morethan if I was a speaking machine--truly, I am not much else.  I will,with your leave, relate to you, miss, the story of one of ourcustomers.""Story!"He seemed wilfully to mistake the word she had repeated, when headded, in a hurry, "Yes, customers; in the banking business weusually call our connection our customers.  He was a Frenchgentleman; a scientific gentleman; a man of great acquirements--aDoctor.""Not of Beauvais?""Why, yes, of Beauvais.  Like Monsieur Manette, your father,the gentleman was of Beauvais.  Like Monsieur Manette, your father,the gentleman was of repute in Paris.  I had the honour of knowinghim there.  Our relations were business relations, but confidential.I was at that time in our French House, and had been--oh! twenty years.""At that time--I may ask, at what time, sir?""I speak, miss, of twenty years ago.  He married--an Englishlady--and I was one of the trustees.  His affairs, like the affairsof many other French gentlemen and French families, were entirely inTellson's hands.  In a similar way I am, or I have been, trustee ofone kind or other for scores of our customers.  These are mere businessrelations, miss; there is no friendship in them, no particularinterest, nothing like sentiment.  I have passed from one to another,in the course of my business life, just as I pass from one of ourcustomers to another in the course of my business day; in short, Ihave no feelings; I am a mere machine.  To go on--""But this is my father's story, sir; and I begin to think"--the curiously roughened forehead was very intent upon him--"thatwhen I was left an orphan through my mother's surviving my fatheronly two years, it was you who brought me to England.  I am almostsure it was you."Mr. Lorry took the hesitating little hand that confidingly advancedto take his, and he put it with some ceremony to his lips.  He thenconducted the young lady straightway to her chair again, and, holdingthe chair-back with his left hand, and using his right by turns torub his chin, pull his wig at the ears, or point what he said, stoodlooking down into her face while she sat looking up into his."Miss Manette, it _was_ I.  And you will see how truly I spoke ofmyself just now, in saying I had no feelings, and that all therelations I hold with my fellow-creatures are mere businessrelations, when you reflect that I have never seen you since.No; you have been the ward of Tellson's House since, and I have beenbusy with the other business of Tellson's House since.  Feelings!I have no time for them, no chance of them.  I pass my whole life,miss, in turning an immense pecuniary Mangle."After this odd description of his daily routine of employment, Mr.Lorry flattened his flaxen wig upon his head with both hands (whichwas most unnecessary, for nothing could be flatter than its shiningsurface was before), and resumed his former attitude."So far, miss (as you have remarked), this is the story of yourregretted father.  Now comes the difference.  If your father had notdied when he did--Don't be frightened!  How you start!"She did, indeed, start.  And she caught his wrist with both her hands."Pray," said Mr. Lorry, in a soothing tone, bringing his left handfrom the back of the chair to lay it on the supplicatory fingers thatclasped him in so violent a tremble:  "pray control your agitation--amatter of business.  As I was saying--"Her look so discomposed him that he stopped, wandered, and began anew:"As I was saying; if Monsieur Manette had not died; if he hadsuddenly and silently disappeared; if he had been spirited away;if it had not been difficult to guess to what dreadful place, thoughno art could trace him; if he had an enemy in some compatriot whocould exercise a privilege that I in my own time have known the boldestpeople afraid to speak of in a whisper, across the water there; forinstance, the privilege of filling up blank forms for the consignmentof any one to the oblivion of a prison for any length of time; if hiswife had implored the king, the queen, the court, the clergy, for anytidings of him, and all quite in vain;--then the history of your fatherwould have been the history of this unfortunate gentleman, the Doctorof Beauvais.""I entreat you to tell me more, sir.""I will.  I am going to.  You can bear it?""I can bear anything but the uncertainty you leave me in at this moment.""You speak collectedly, and you--_are_ collected.  That's good!"(Though his manner was less satisfied than his words.) "A matter ofbusiness.  Regard it as a matter of business--business that must bedone.  Now if this doctor's wife, though a lady of great courage andspirit, had suffered so intensely from this cause before her littlechild was born--""The little child was a daughter, sir.""A daughter.  A-a-matter of business--don't be distressed.  Miss,if the poor lady had suffered so intensely before her little childwas born, that she came to the determination of sparing the poorchild the inheritance of any part of the agony she had known thepains of, by rearing her in the belief that her father was dead--No, don't kneel!  In Heaven's name why should you kneel to me!""For the truth.  O dear, good, compassionate sir, for the truth!""A--a matter of business.  You confuse me, and how can I transactbusiness if I am confused?  Let us be clear-headed.  If you couldkindly mention now, for instance, what nine times ninepence are,or how many shillings in twenty guineas, it would be so encouraging.I should be so much more at my ease about your state of mind."Without directly answering to this appeal, she sat so still whenhe had very gently raised her, and the hands that had not ceasedto clasp his wrists were so much more steady than they had been,that she communicated some reassurance to Mr. Jarvis Lorry."That's right, that's right.  Courage!  Business!  You have businessbefore you; useful business.  Miss Manette, your mother took thiscourse with you.  And when she died--I believe broken-hearted--having never slackened her unavailing search for your father,she left you, at two years old, to grow to be blooming, beautiful,and happy, without the dark cloud upon you of living in uncertaintywhether your father soon wore his heart out in prison, or wastedthere through many lingering years."As he said the words he looked down, with an admiring pity, on theflowing golden hair; as if he pictured to himself that it might havebeen already tinged with grey."You know that your parents had no great possession, and that whatthey had was secured to your mother and to you.  There has been nonew discovery, of money, or of any other property; but--"He felt his wrist held closer, and he stopped.  The expression in theforehead, which had so particularly attracted his notice, and whichwas now immovable, had deepened into one of pain and horror."But he has been--been found.  He is alive.  Greatly changed, it istoo probable; almost a wreck, it is possible; though we will hope thebest.  Still, alive.  Your father has been taken to the house of anold servant in Paris, and we are going there:  I, to identify him ifI can:  you, to restore him to life, love, duty, rest, comfort."A shiver ran through her frame, and from it through his.  She said,in a low, distinct, awe-stricken voice, as if she were saying it in adream,"I am going to see his Ghost!  It will be his Ghost--not him!"Mr. Lorry quietly chafed the hands that held his arm.  "There, there,there!  See now, see now!  The best and the worst are known to you, now.You are well on your way to the poor wronged gentleman, and, with a fairsea voyage, and a fair land journey, you will be soon at his dear side."She repeated in the same tone, sunk to a whisper, "I have been free,I have been happy, yet his Ghost has never haunted me!""Only one thing more," said Mr. Lorry, laying stress upon it as awholesome means of enforcing her attention:  "he has been found underanother name; his own, long forgotten or long concealed.  It would beworse than useless now to inquire which; worse than useless to seekto know whether he has been for years overlooked, or always designedlyheld prisoner.  It would be worse than useless now to make any inquiries,because it would be dangerous.  Better not to mention the subject,anywhere or in any way, and to remove him--for a while at all events--out of France.  Even I, safe as an Englishman, and even Tellson's,important as they are to French credit, avoid all naming of thematter.  I carry about me, not a scrap of writing openly referring toit.  This is a secret service altogether.  My credentials, entries,and memoranda, are all comprehended in the one line, `Recalled toLife;' which may mean anything.  But what is the matter!  She doesn'tnotice a word!  Miss Manette!"Perfectly still and silent, and not even fallen back in her chair,she sat under his hand, utterly insensible; with her eyes open andfixed upon him, and with that last expression looking as if it werecarved or branded into her forehead.  So close was her hold upon hisarm, that he feared to detach himself lest he should hurt her;therefore he called out loudly for assistance without moving.A wild-looking woman, whom even in his agitation, Mr. Lorry observedto be all of a red colour, and to have red hair, and to be dressed insome extraordinary tight-fitting fashion, and to have on her head amost wonderful bonnet like a Grenadier wooden measure, and goodmeasure too, or a great Stilton cheese, came running into the room inadvance of the inn servants, and soon settled the question of hisdetachment from the poor young lady, by laying a brawny hand upon hischest, and sending him flying back against the nearest wall.("I really think this must be a man!" was Mr. Lorry's breathlessreflection, simultaneously with his coming against the wall.)"Why, look at you all!" bawled this figure, addressing the innservants.  "Why don't you go and fetch things, instead of standingthere staring at me?  I am not so much to look at, am I?  Why don'tyou go and fetch things?  I'll let you know, if you don't bringsmelling-salts, cold water, and vinegar, quick, I will."There was an immediate dispersal for these restoratives, and shesoftly laid the patient on a sofa, and tended her with great skilland gentleness:  calling her "my precious!" and "my bird!" and spreadingher golden hair aside over her shoulders with great pride and care."And you in brown!" she said, indignantly turning to Mr. Lorry;"couldn't you tell her what you had to tell her, without frighteningher to death?  Look at her, with her pretty pale face and her coldhands.  Do you call _that_ being a Banker?"Mr. Lorry was so exceedingly disconcerted by a question so hard toanswer, that he could only look on, at a distance, with much feeblersympathy and humility, while the strong woman, having banished theinn servants under the mysterious penalty of "letting them know"something not mentioned if they stayed there, staring, recovered hercharge by a regular series of gradations, and coaxed her to lay herdrooping head upon her shoulder."I hope she will do well now," said Mr. Lorry."No thanks to you in brown, if she does.  My darling pretty!""I hope," said Mr. Lorry, after another pause of feeble sympathy andhumility, "that you accompany Miss Manette to France?""A likely thing, too!" replied the strong woman.  "If it was everintended that I should go across salt water, do you supposeProvidence would have cast my lot in an island?"This being another question hard to answer, Mr. Jarvis Lorry withdrewto consider it.VThe Wine-shopA large cask of wine had been dropped and broken, in the street.The accident had happened in getting it out of a cart; the cask hadtumbled out with a run, the hoops had burst, and it lay on the stonesjust outside the door of the wine-shop, shattered like awalnut-shell.All the people within reach had suspended their business, or theiridleness, to run to the spot and drink the wine.  The rough,irregular stones of the street, pointing every way, and designed,one might have thought, expressly to lame all living creatures thatapproached them, had dammed it into little pools; these were surrounded,each by its own jostling group or crowd, according to its size.Some men kneeled down, made scoops of their two hands joined, andsipped, or tried to help women, who bent over their shoulders, tosip, before the wine had all run out between their fingers.  Others,men and women, dipped in the puddles with little mugs of mutilatedearthenware, or even with handkerchiefs from women's heads, whichwere squeezed dry into infants' mouths; others made small mud-embankments, to stem the wine as it ran; others, directed bylookers-on up at high windows, darted here and there, to cut offlittle streams of wine that started away in new directions; othersdevoted themselves to the sodden and lee-dyed pieces of the cask,licking, and even champing the moister wine-rotted fragments witheager relish.  There was no drainage to carry off the wine, and notonly did it all get taken up, but so much mud got taken up along withit, that there might have been a scavenger in the street, if anybodyacquainted with it could have believed in such a miraculous presence.A shrill sound of laughter and of amused voices--voices of men,women, and children--resounded in the street while this wine gamelasted.  There was little roughness in the sport, and much playfulness.There was a special companionship in it, an observable inclination onthe part of every one to join some other one, which led, especiallyamong the luckier or lighter-hearted, to frolicsome embraces,drinking of healths, shaking of hands, and even joining of hands anddancing, a dozen together.  When the wine was gone, and the placeswhere it had been most abundant were raked into a gridiron-pattern byfingers, these demonstrations ceased, as suddenly as they had brokenout.  The man who had left his saw sticking in the firewood he wascutting, set it in motion again; the women who had left on a door-stepthe little pot of hot ashes, at which she had been trying to softenthe pain in her own starved fingers and toes, or in those of herchild, returned to it; men with bare arms, matted locks, and cadaverousfaces, who had emerged into the winter light from cellars, movedaway, to descend again; and a gloom gathered on the scene thatappeared more natural to it than sunshine.The wine was red wine, and had stained the ground of the narrowstreet in the suburb of Saint Antoine, in Paris, where it wasspilled.  It had stained many hands, too, and many faces, and manynaked feet, and many wooden shoes.  The hands of the man who sawedthe wood, left red marks on the billets; and the forehead of thewoman who nursed her baby, was stained with the stain of the old ragshe wound about her head again.  Those who had been greedy with thestaves of the cask, had acquired a tigerish smear about the mouth;and one tall joker so besmirched, his head more out of a long squalidbag of a nightcap than in it, scrawled upon a wall with his fingerdipped in muddy wine-lees--BLOOD.The time was to come, when that wine too would be spilled on thestreet-stones, and when the stain of it would be red upon many there.And now that the cloud settled on Saint Antoine, which a momentarygleam had driven from his sacred countenance, the darkness of it washeavy--cold, dirt, sickness, ignorance, and want, were the lords inwaiting on the saintly presence--nobles of great power all of them;but, most especially the last.  Samples of a people that hadundergone a terrible grinding and regrinding in the mill, andcertainly not in the fabulous mill which ground old people young,shivered at every corner, passed in and out at every doorway, lookedfrom every window, fluttered in every vestige of a garment that thewind shook.  The mill which had worked them down, was the mill thatgrinds young people old; the children had ancient faces and gravevoices; and upon them, and upon the grown faces, and ploughed intoevery furrow of age and coming up afresh, was the sigh, Hunger.  Itwas prevalent everywhere.  Hunger was pushed out of the tall houses,in the wretched clothing that hung upon poles and lines; Hunger waspatched into them with straw and rag and wood and paper; Hunger wasrepeated in every fragment of the small modicum of firewood that theman sawed off; Hunger stared down from the smokeless chimneys, andstarted up from the filthy street that had no offal, among its refuse,of anything to eat.  Hunger was the inscription on the baker'sshelves, written in every small loaf of his scanty stock of badbread; at the sausage-shop, in every dead-dog preparation that wasoffered for sale.  Hunger rattled its dry bones among the roastingchestnuts in the turned cylinder; Hunger was shred into atomics inevery farthing porringer of husky chips of potato, fried with somereluctant drops of oil.Its abiding place was in all things fitted to it.  A narrow windingstreet, full of offence and stench, with other narrow winding streetsdiverging, all peopled by rags and nightcaps, and all smelling ofrags and nightcaps, and all visible things with a brooding look uponthem that looked ill.  In the hunted air of the people there was yetsome wild-beast thought of the possibility of turning at bay.  Depressedand slinking though they were, eyes of fire were not wanting amongthem; nor compressed lips, white with what they suppressed; norforeheads knitted into the likeness of the gallows-rope they musedabout enduring, or inflicting.  The trade signs (and they were almostas many as the shops) were, all, grim illustrations of Want.  Thebutcher and the porkman painted up, only the leanest scrags of meat;the baker, the coarsest of meagre loaves.  The people rudely picturedas drinking in the wine-shops, croaked over their scanty measures ofthin wine and beer, and were gloweringly confidential together.Nothing was represented in a flourishing condition, save tools andweapons; but, the cutler's knives and axes were sharp and bright, thesmith's hammers were heavy, and the gunmaker's stock was murderous.The crippling stones of the pavement, with their many littlereservoirs of mud and water, had no footways, but broke off abruptlyat the doors.  The kennel, to make amends, ran down the middle of thestreet--when it ran at all:  which was only after heavy rains, andthen it ran, by many eccentric fits, into the houses.  Across thestreets, at wide intervals, one clumsy lamp was slung by a rope andpulley; at night, when the lamplighter had let these down, and lighted,and hoisted them again, a feeble grove of dim wicks swung in a sicklymanner overhead, as if they were at sea.  Indeed they were at sea,and the ship and crew were in peril of tempest.For, the time was to come, when the gaunt scarecrows of that regionshould have watched the lamplighter, in their idleness and hunger,so long, as to conceive the idea of improving on his method, andhauling up men by those ropes and pulleys, to flare upon thedarkness of their condition.  But, the time was not come yet; andevery wind that blew over France shook the rags of the scarecrowsin vain, for the birds, fine of song and feather, took no warning.The wine-shop was a corner shop, better than most others in itsappearance and degree, and the master of the wine-shop had stoodoutside it, in a yellow waistcoat and green breeches, looking on atthe struggle for the lost wine.  "It's not my affair," said he,with a final shrug of the shoulders.  "The people from the marketdid it.  Let them bring another."There, his eyes happening to catch the tall joker writing up hisjoke, he called to him across the way:"Say, then, my Gaspard, what do you do there?"The fellow pointed to his joke with immense significance, as is oftenthe way with his tribe.  It missed its mark, and completely failed,as is often the way with his tribe too."What now?  Are you a subject for the mad hospital?" said thewine-shop keeper, crossing the road, and obliterating the jest witha handful of mud, picked up for the purpose, and smeared over it."Why do you write in the public streets?  Is there--tell me thou--isthere no other place to write such words in?"In his expostulation he dropped his cleaner hand (perhaps accidentally,perhaps not) upon the joker's heart.  The joker rapped it with hisown, took a nimble spring upward, and came down in a fantasticdancing attitude, with one of his stained shoes jerked off his footinto his hand, and held out.  A joker of an extremely, not to saywolfishly practical character, he looked, under those circumstances."Put it on, put it on," said the other.  "Call wine, wine; and finishthere."  With that advice, he wiped his soiled hand upon the joker'sdress, such as it was--quite deliberately, as having dirtied the handon his account; and then recrossed the road and entered the wine-shop.This wine-shop keeper was a bull-necked, martial-looking man ofthirty, and he should have been of a hot temperament, for, althoughit was a bitter day, he wore no coat, but carried one slung over hisshoulder.  His shirt-sleeves were rolled up, too, and his brown armswere bare to the elbows.  Neither did he wear anything more on hishead than his own crisply-curling short dark hair.  He was a dark manaltogether, with good eyes and a good bold breadth between them.Good-humoured looking on the whole, but implacable-looking, too;evidently a man of a strong resolution and a set purpose; a man notdesirable to be met, rushing down a narrow pass with a gulf on eitherside, for nothing would turn the man.Madame Defarge, his wife, sat in the shop behind the counter as hecame in.  Madame Defarge was a stout woman of about his own age, witha watchful eye that seldom seemed to look at anything, a large handheavily ringed, a steady face, strong features, and great composureof manner.  There was a character about Madame Defarge, from whichone might have predicated that she did not often make mistakes againstherself in any of the reckonings over which she presided.  MadameDefarge being sensitive to cold, was wrapped in fur, and had aquantity of bright shawl twined about her head, though not to theconcealment of her large earrings.  Her knitting was before her, butshe had laid it down to pick her teeth with a toothpick.  Thusengaged, with her right elbow supported by her left hand, MadameDefarge said nothing when her lord came in, but coughed just onegrain of cough.  This, in combination with the lifting of her darklydefined eyebrows over her toothpick by the breadth of a line, suggestedto her husband that he would do well to look round the shop among thecustomers, for any new customer who had dropped in while he steppedover the way.The wine-shop keeper accordingly rolled his eyes about, until theyrested upon an elderly gentleman and a young lady, who were seated ina corner.  Other company were there:  two playing cards, two playingdominoes, three standing by the counter lengthening out a shortsupply of wine.  As he passed behind the counter, he took notice thatthe elderly gentleman said in a look to the young lady, "This is ourman.""What the devil do _you_ do in that galley there?" said MonsieurDefarge to himself; "I don't know you."But, he feigned not to notice the two strangers, and fell intodiscourse with the triumvirate of customers who were drinking at thecounter."How goes it, Jacques?" said one of these three to Monsieur Defarge."Is all the spilt wine swallowed?""Every drop, Jacques," answered Monsieur Defarge.When this interchange of Christian name was effected, Madame Defarge,picking her teeth with her toothpick, coughed another grain of cough,and raised her eyebrows by the breadth of another line."It is not often," said the second of the three, addressing MonsieurDefarge, "that many of these miserable beasts know the taste of wine,or of anything but black bread and death.  Is it not so, Jacques?""It is so, Jacques," Monsieur Defarge returned.At this second interchange of the Christian name, Madame Defarge,still using her toothpick with profound composure, coughed anothergrain of cough, and raised her eyebrows by the breadth of another line.The last of the three now said his say, as he put down his emptydrinking vessel and smacked his lips."Ah!  So much the worse!  A bitter taste it is that such poor cattlealways have in their mouths, and hard lives they live, Jacques.Am I right, Jacques?""You are right, Jacques," was the response of Monsieur Defarge.This third interchange of the Christian name was completed at themoment when Madame Defarge put her toothpick by, kept her eyebrowsup, and slightly rustled in her seat."Hold then!  True!" muttered her husband.  "Gentlemen--my wife!"The three customers pulled off their hats to Madame Defarge, withthree flourishes.  She acknowledged their homage by bending her head,and giving them a quick look.  Then she glanced in a casual mannerround the wine-shop, took up her knitting with great apparentcalmness and repose of spirit, and became absorbed in it."Gentlemen," said her husband, who had kept his bright eyeobservantly upon her, "good day.  The chamber, furnished bachelor-fashion, that you wished to see, and were inquiring for when Istepped out, is on the fifth floor.  The doorway of the staircasegives on the little courtyard close to the left here," pointing withhis hand, "near to the window of my establishment.  But, now that Iremember, one of you has already been there, and can show the way.Gentlemen, adieu!"They paid for their wine, and left the place.  The eyes of MonsieurDefarge were studying his wife at her knitting when the elderlygentleman advanced from his corner, and begged the favour of a word."Willingly, sir," said Monsieur Defarge, and quietly stepped with himto the door.Their conference was very short, but very decided.  Almost at thefirst word, Monsieur Defarge started and became deeply attentive.It had not lasted a minute, when he nodded and went out.  Thegentleman then beckoned to the young lady, and they, too, went out.Madame Defarge knitted with nimble fingers and steady eyebrows, andsaw nothing.Mr. Jarvis Lorry and Miss Manette, emerging from the wine-shop thus,joined Monsieur Defarge in the doorway to which he had directed hisown company just before.  It opened from a stinking little blackcourtyard, and was the general public entrance to a great pile ofhouses, inhabited by a great number of people.  In the gloomy tile-paved entry to the gloomy tile-paved staircase, Monsieur Defarge bentdown on one knee to the child of his old master, and put her hand tohis lips.  It was a gentle action, but not at all gently done; a veryremarkable transformation had come over him in a few seconds.  He hadno good-humour in his face, nor any openness of aspect left, but hadbecome a secret, angry, dangerous man."It is very high; it is a little difficult.  Better to begin slowly."Thus, Monsieur Defarge, in a stern voice, to Mr. Lorry, as they beganascending the stairs."Is he alone?" the latter whispered."Alone!  God help him, who should be with him!" said the other, in thesame low voice."Is he always alone, then?""Yes.""Of his own desire?""Of his own necessity.  As he was, when I first saw him after theyfound me and demanded to know if I would take him, and, at my perilbe discreet--as he was then, so he is now.""He is greatly changed?""Changed!"The keeper of the wine-shop stopped to strike the wall with his hand,and mutter a tremendous curse.  No direct answer could have been halfso forcible.  Mr. Lorry's spirits grew heavier and heavier, as he andhis two companions ascended higher and higher.Such a staircase, with its accessories, in the older and more crowdedparts of Paris, would be bad enough now; but, at that time, it wasvile indeed to unaccustomed and unhardened senses.  Every littlehabitation within the great foul nest of one high building--that isto say, the room or rooms within every door that opened on thegeneral staircase--left its own heap of refuse on its own landing,besides flinging other refuse from its own windows.  The uncontrollableand hopeless mass of decomposition so engendered, would have pollutedthe air, even if poverty and deprivation had not loaded it with theirintangible impurities; the two bad sources combined made it almostinsupportable.  Through such an atmosphere, by a steep dark shaft ofdirt and poison, the way lay.  Yielding to his own disturbance ofmind, and to his young companion's agitation, which became greaterevery instant, Mr. Jarvis Lorry twice stopped to rest.  Each of thesestoppages was made at a doleful grating, by which any languishinggood airs that were left uncorrupted, seemed to escape, and allspoilt and sickly vapours seemed to crawl in.  Through the rustedbars, tastes, rather than glimpses, were caught of the jumbledneighbourhood; and nothing within range, nearer or lower than thesummits of the two great towers of Notre-Dame, had any promise on itof healthy life or wholesome aspirations.At last, the top of the staircase was gained, and they stopped forthe third time.  There was yet an upper staircase, of a steeperinclination and of contracted dimensions, to be ascended, before thegarret story was reached.  The keeper of the wine-shop, always goinga little in advance, and always going on the side which Mr. Lorrytook, as though he dreaded to be asked any question by the younglady, turned himself about here, and, carefully feeling in thepockets of the coat he carried over his shoulder, took out a key."The door is locked then, my friend?" said Mr. Lorry, surprised."Ay.  Yes," was the grim reply of Monsieur Defarge."You think it necessary to keep the unfortunate gentleman so retired?""I think it necessary to turn the key."  Monsieur Defarge whispered itcloser in his ear, and frowned heavily."Why?""Why!  Because he has lived so long, locked up, that he would befrightened--rave--tear himself to pieces--die--come to I know not whatharm--if his door was left open.""Is it possible!" exclaimed Mr. Lorry."Is it possible!" repeated Defarge, bitterly.  "Yes.  And a beautifulworld we live in, when it _is_ possible, and when many other suchthings are possible, and not only possible, but done--done, seeyou!--under that sky there, every day.  Long live the Devil.  Let usgo on."This dialogue had been held in so very low a whisper, that not a wordof it had reached the young lady's ears.  But, by this time shetrembled under such strong emotion, and her face expressed such deepanxiety, and, above all, such dread and terror, that Mr. Lorry feltit incumbent on him to speak a word or two of reassurance."Courage, dear miss!  Courage!  Business!  The worst will be overin a moment; it is but passing the room-door, and the worst is over.Then, all the good you bring to him, all the relief, all thehappiness you bring to him, begin.  Let our good friend here,assist you on that side.  That's well, friend Defarge.  Come, now.Business, business!"They went up slowly and softly.  The staircase was short, and theywere soon at the top.  There, as it had an abrupt turn in it, theycame all at once in sight of three men, whose heads were bent downclose together at the side of a door, and who were intently lookinginto the room to which the door belonged, through some chinks orholes in the wall.  On hearing footsteps close at hand, these threeturned, and rose, and showed themselves to be the three of one namewho had been drinking in the wine-shop."I forgot them in the surprise of your visit," explained MonsieurDefarge.  "Leave us, good boys; we have business here."The three glided by, and went silently down.There appearing to be no other door on that floor, and the keeper ofthe wine-shop going straight to this one when they were left alone,Mr. Lorry asked him in a whisper, with a little anger:"Do you make a show of Monsieur Manette?""I show him, in the way you have seen, to a chosen few.""Is that well?""_I_ think it is well.""Who are the few?  How do you choose them?""I choose them as real men, of my name--Jacques is my name--to whomthe sight is likely to do good.  Enough; you are English; that isanother thing.  Stay there, if you please, a little moment."With an admonitory gesture to keep them back, he stooped, and lookedin through the crevice in the wall.  Soon raising his head again, hestruck twice or thrice upon the door--evidently with no other objectthan to make a noise there.  With the same intention, he drew the keyacross it, three or four times, before he put it clumsily into thelock, and turned it as heavily as he could.The door slowly opened inward under his hand, and he looked into theroom and said something.  A faint voice answered something.  Littlemore than a single syllable could have been spoken on either side.He looked back over his shoulder, and beckoned them to enter.Mr. Lorry got his arm securely round the daughter's waist, and heldher; for he felt that she was sinking."A-a-a-business, business!" he urged, with a moisture that was not ofbusiness shining on his cheek.  "Come in, come in!""I am afraid of it," she answered, shuddering."Of it?  What?""I mean of him.  Of my father."Rendered in a manner desperate, by her state and by the beckoning oftheir conductor, he drew over his neck the arm that shook upon hisshoulder, lifted her a little, and hurried her into the room.  He sather down just within the door, and held her, clinging to him.Defarge drew out the key, closed the door, locked it on the inside,took out the key again, and held it in his hand.  All this he did,methodically, and with as loud and harsh an accompaniment of noise ashe could make.  Finally, he walked across the room with a measuredtread to where the window was.  He stopped there, and faced round.The garret, built to be a depository for firewood and the like, wasdim and dark:  for, the window of dormer shape, was in truth a door inthe roof, with a little crane over it for the hoisting up of storesfrom the street:  unglazed, and closing up the middle in two pieces,like any other door of French construction.  To exclude the cold, onehalf of this door was fast closed, and the other was opened but avery little way.  Such a scanty portion of light was admitted throughthese means, that it was difficult, on first coming in, to seeanything; and long habit alone could have slowly formed in any one,the ability to do any work requiring nicety in such obscurity.  Yet,work of that kind was being done in the garret; for, with his backtowards the door, and his face towards the window where the keeper ofthe wine-shop stood looking at him, a white-haired man sat on a lowbench, stooping forward and very busy, making shoes.VIThe Shoemaker"Good day!" said Monsieur Defarge, looking down at the white headthat bent low over the shoemaking.It was raised for a moment, and a very faint voice responded to thesalutation, as if it were at a distance:"Good day!""You are still hard at work, I see?"After a long silence, the head was lifted for another moment, and thevoice replied, "Yes--I am working."  This time, a pair of haggard eyeshad looked at the questioner, before the face had dropped again.The faintness of the voice was pitiable and dreadful.  It was not thefaintness of physical weakness, though confinement and hard fare nodoubt had their part in it.  Its deplorable peculiarity was, that itwas the faintness of solitude and disuse.  It was like the lastfeeble echo of a sound made long and long ago.  So entirely had itlost the life and resonance of the human voice, that it affected thesenses like a once beautiful colour faded away into a poor weakstain.  So sunken and suppressed it was, that it was like a voiceunderground.  So expressive it was, of a hopeless and lost creature,that a famished traveller, wearied out by lonely wandering in awilderness, would have remembered home and friends in such a tonebefore lying down to die.Some minutes of silent work had passed:  and the haggard eyes hadlooked up again:  not with any interest or curiosity, but with a dullmechanical perception, beforehand, that the spot where the onlyvisitor they were aware of had stood, was not yet empty."I want," said Defarge, who had not removed his gaze from theshoemaker, "to let in a little more light here.  You can bear alittle more?"The shoemaker stopped his work; looked with a vacant air of listening,at the floor on one side of him; then similarly, at the floor on theother side of him; then, upward at the speaker."What did you say?""You can bear a little more light?""I must bear it, if you let it in."  (Laying the palest shadow of astress upon the second word.)The opened half-door was opened a little further, and secured at thatangle for the time.  A broad ray of light fell into the garret, andshowed the workman with an unfinished shoe upon his lap, pausing inhis labour.  His few common tools and various scraps of leather wereat his feet and on his bench.  He had a white beard, raggedly cut,but not very long, a hollow face, and exceedingly bright eyes.  Thehollowness and thinness of his face would have caused them to looklarge, under his yet dark eyebrows and his confused white hair,though they had been really otherwise; but, they were naturallylarge, and looked unnaturally so.  His yellow rags of shirt lay openat the throat, and showed his body to be withered and worn.  He, andhis old canvas frock, and his loose stockings, and all his poortatters of clothes, had, in a long seclusion from direct light andair, faded down to such a dull uniformity of parchment-yellow, thatit would have been hard to say which was which.He had put up a hand between his eyes and the light, and the verybones of it seemed transparent.  So he sat, with a steadfastly vacantgaze, pausing in his work.  He never looked at the figure before him,without first looking down on this side of himself, then on that, asif he had lost the habit of associating place with sound; he neverspoke, without first wandering in this manner, and forgetting to speak."Are you going to finish that pair of shoes to-day?" asked Defarge,motioning to Mr. Lorry to come forward."What did you say?""Do you mean to finish that pair of shoes to-day?""I can't say that I mean to.  I suppose so.  I don't know."But, the question reminded him of his work, and he bent over it again.Mr. Lorry came silently forward, leaving the daughter by the door.When he had stood, for a minute or two, by the side of Defarge, theshoemaker looked up.  He showed no surprise at seeing another figure,but the unsteady fingers of one of his hands strayed to his lips ashe looked at it (his lips and his nails were of the same pale lead-colour), and then the hand dropped to his work, and he once more bentover the shoe.  The look and the action had occupied but an instant."You have a visitor, you see," said Monsieur Defarge."What did you say?""Here is a visitor."The shoemaker looked up as before, but without removing a hand fromhis work."Come!" said Defarge.  "Here is monsieur, who knows a well-made shoewhen he sees one.  Show him that shoe you are working at.  Take it,monsieur."Mr. Lorry took it in his hand."Tell monsieur what kind of shoe it is, and the maker's name."There was a longer pause than usual, before the shoemaker replied:"I forget what it was you asked me.  What did you say?""I said, couldn't you describe the kind of shoe, for monsieur'sinformation?""It is a lady's shoe.  It is a young lady's walking-shoe.  It is in thepresent mode.  I never saw the mode.  I have had a pattern in my hand."He glanced at the shoe with some little passing touch of pride."And the maker's name?" said Defarge.Now that he had no work to hold, he laid the knuckles of the right handin the hollow of the left, and then the knuckles of the left hand in thehollow of the right, and then passed a hand across his bearded chin,and so on in regular changes, without a moment's intermission.The task of recalling him from the vagrancy into which he alwayssank when he had spoken, was like recalling some very weak personfrom a swoon, or endeavouring, in the hope of some disclosure,to stay the spirit of a fast-dying man."Did you ask me for my name?""Assuredly I did.""One Hundred and Five, North Tower.""Is that all?""One Hundred and Five, North Tower."With a weary sound that was not a sigh, nor a groan, he bent to workagain, until the silence was again broken."You are not a shoemaker by trade?" said Mr. Lorry, looking steadfastlyat him.His haggard eyes turned to Defarge as if he would have transferredthe question to him:  but as no help came from that quarter, theyturned back on the questioner when they had sought the ground."I am not a shoemaker by trade?  No, I was not a shoemaker by trade.I-I learnt it here.  I taught myself.  I asked leave to--"He lapsed away, even for minutes, ringing those measured changes onhis hands the whole time.  His eyes came slowly back, at last, to theface from which they had wandered; when they rested on it, he started,and resumed, in the manner of a sleeper that moment awake,reverting to a subject of last night."I asked leave to teach myself, and I got it with much difficultyafter a long while, and I have made shoes ever since."As he held out his hand for the shoe that had been taken from him,Mr. Lorry said, still looking steadfastly in his face:"Monsieur Manette, do you remember nothing of me?"The shoe dropped to the ground, and he sat looking fixedly at thequestioner."Monsieur Manette"; Mr. Lorry laid his hand upon Defarge's arm;"do you remember nothing of this man?  Look at him.  Look at me.Is there no old banker, no old business, no old servant, no old time,rising in your mind, Monsieur Manette?"As the captive of many years sat looking fixedly, by turns, atMr. Lorry and at Defarge, some long obliterated marks of an activelyintent intelligence in the middle of the forehead, gradually forcedthemselves through the black mist that had fallen on him.  They wereoverclouded again, they were fainter, they were gone; but they hadbeen there.  And so exactly was the expression repeated on the fairyoung face of her who had crept along the wall to a point where shecould see him, and where she now stood looking at him, with handswhich at first had been only raised in frightened compassion, if noteven to keep him off and shut out the sight of him, but which werenow extending towards him, trembling with eagerness to lay thespectral face upon her warm young breast, and love it back to lifeand hope--so exactly was the expression repeated (though in strongercharacters) on her fair young face, that it looked as though it hadpassed like a moving light, from him to her.Darkness had fallen on him in its place.  He looked at the two, lessand less attentively, and his eyes in gloomy abstraction sought theground and looked about him in the old way.  Finally, with a deeplong sigh, he took the shoe up, and resumed his work."Have you recognised him, monsieur?" asked Defarge in a whisper."Yes; for a moment.  At first I thought it quite hopeless, but I haveunquestionably seen, for a single moment, the face that I once knewso well.  Hush!  Let us draw further back.  Hush!"She had moved from the wall of the garret, very near to the bench onwhich he sat.  There was something awful in his unconsciousness ofthe figure that could have put out its hand and touched him as hestooped over his labour.Not a word was spoken, not a sound was made.  She stood, like aspirit, beside him, and he bent over his work.It happened, at length, that he had occasion to change the instrumentin his hand, for his shoemaker's knife.  It lay on that side of himwhich was not the side on which she stood.  He had taken it up, andwas stooping to work again, when his eyes caught the skirt of herdress.  He raised them, and saw her face.  The two spectators startedforward, but she stayed them with a motion of her hand.  She had nofear of his striking at her with the knife, though they had.He stared at her with a fearful look, and after a while his lipsbegan to form some words, though no sound proceeded from them.  Bydegrees, in the pauses of his quick and laboured breathing, he washeard to say:"What is this?"With the tears streaming down her face, she put her two hands to herlips, and kissed them to him; then clasped them on her breast, as ifshe laid his ruined head there."You are not the gaoler's daughter?"She sighed "No.""Who are you?"Not yet trusting the tones of her voice, she sat down on the benchbeside him.  He recoiled, but she laid her hand upon his arm.  Astrange thrill struck him when she did so, and visibly passed overhis frame; he laid the knife down softly, as he sat staring at her.Her golden hair, which she wore in long curls, had been hurriedlypushed aside, and fell down over her neck.  Advancing his hand bylittle and little, he took it up and looked at it.  In the midst ofthe action he went astray, and, with another deep sigh, fell to workat his shoemaking.But not for long.  Releasing his arm, she laid her hand upon hisshoulder.  After looking doubtfully at it, two or three times, as ifto be sure that it was really there, he laid down his work, put hishand to his neck, and took off a blackened string with a scrap offolded rag attached to it.  He opened this, carefully, on his knee,and it contained a very little quantity of hair:  not more than one ortwo long golden hairs, which he had, in some old day, wound off uponhis finger.He took her hair into his hand again, and looked closely at it.  "Itis the same.  How can it be!  When was it!  How was it!"As the concentrated expression returned to his forehead, he seemed tobecome conscious that it was in hers too.  He turned her full to thelight, and looked at her."She had laid her head upon my shoulder, that night when I wassummoned out--she had a fear of my going, though I had none--and whenI was brought to the North Tower they found these upon my sleeve.'You will leave me them?  They can never help me to escape in thebody, though they may in the spirit.' Those were the words I said.I remember them very well."He formed this speech with his lips many times before he could utterit.  But when he did find spoken words for it, they came to himcoherently, though slowly."How was this?--_Was it you_?"Once more, the two spectators started, as he turned upon her with afrightful suddenness.  But she sat perfectly still in his grasp, andonly said, in a low voice, "I entreat you, good gentlemen, do notcome near us, do not speak, do not move!""Hark!" he exclaimed.  "Whose voice was that?"His hands released her as he uttered this cry, and went up to hiswhite hair, which they tore in a frenzy.  It died out, as everythingbut his shoemaking did die out of him, and he refolded his littlepacket and tried to secure it in his breast; but he still looked ather, and gloomily shook his head."No, no, no; you are too young, too blooming.  It can't be.  See whatthe prisoner is.  These are not the hands she knew, this is not theface she knew, this is not a voice she ever heard.  No, no.  Shewas--and He was--before the slow years of the North Tower--ages ago.What is your name, my gentle angel?"Hailing his softened tone and manner, his daughter fell upon herknees before him, with her appealing hands upon his breast."O, sir, at another time you shall know my name, and who my motherwas, and who my father, and how I never knew their hard, hardhistory.  But I cannot tell you at this time, and I cannot tell youhere.  All that I may tell you, here and now, is, that I pray to youto touch me and to bless me.  Kiss me, kiss me!  O my dear, my dear!"His cold white head mingled with her radiant hair, which warmed andlighted it as though it were the light of Freedom shining on him."If you hear in my voice--I don't know that it is so, but I hope itis--if you hear in my voice any resemblance to a voice that once wassweet music in your ears, weep for it, weep for it!  If you touch,in touching my hair, anything that recalls a beloved head that lay onyour breast when you were young and free, weep for it, weep for it!If, when I hint to you of a Home that is before us, where I will betrue to you with all my duty and with all my faithful service, Ibring back the remembrance of a Home long desolate, while your poorheart pined away, weep for it, weep for it!"She held him closer round the neck, and rocked him on her breastlike a child."If, when I tell you, dearest dear, that your agony is over, and thatI have come here to take you from it, and that we go to England to beat peace and at rest, I cause you to think of your useful life laidwaste, and of our native France so wicked to you, weep for it, weepfor it!  And if, when I shall tell you of my name, and of my fatherwho is living, and of my mother who is dead, you learn that I have tokneel to my honoured father, and implore his pardon for having neverfor his sake striven all day and lain awake and wept all night,because the love of my poor mother hid his torture from me, weep forit, weep for it!  Weep for her, then, and for me!  Good gentlemen,thank God!  I feel his sacred tears upon my face, and his sobs strikeagainst my heart.  O, see!  Thank God for us, thank God!"He had sunk in her arms, and his face dropped on her breast:  a sightso touching, yet so terrible in the tremendous wrong and sufferingwhich had gone before it, that the two beholders covered their faces.When the quiet of the garret had been long undisturbed, and hisheaving breast and shaken form had long yielded to the calm that mustfollow all storms--emblem to humanity, of the rest and silence intowhich the storm called Life must hush at last--they came forward toraise the father and daughter from the ground.  He had graduallydropped to the floor, and lay there in a lethargy, worn out.  She hadnestled down with him, that his head might lie upon her arm; and herhair drooping over him curtained him from the light."If, without disturbing him," she said, raising her hand to Mr. Lorryas he stooped over them, after repeated blowings of his nose, "allcould be arranged for our leaving Paris at once, so that, from thevery door, he could be taken away--""But, consider.  Is he fit for the journey?" asked Mr. Lorry."More fit for that, I think, than to remain in this city, so dreadful to him.""It is true," said Defarge, who was kneeling to look on and hear."More than that; Monsieur Manette is, for all reasons, best out ofFrance.  Say, shall I hire a carriage and post-horses?""That's business," said Mr. Lorry, resuming on the shortest noticehis methodical manners; "and if business is to be done, I had better do it.""Then be so kind," urged Miss Manette, "as to leave us here.  You seehow composed he has become, and you cannot be afraid to leave himwith me now.  Why should you be?  If you will lock the door to secureus from interruption, I do not doubt that you will find him, when youcome back, as quiet as you leave him.  In any case, I will take careof him until you return, and then we will remove him straight."Both Mr. Lorry and Defarge were rather disinclined to this course,and in favour of one of them remaining.  But, as there were not onlycarriage and horses to be seen to, but travelling papers; and as timepressed, for the day was drawing to an end, it came at last to theirhastily dividing the business that was necessary to be done, andhurrying away to do it.Then, as the darkness closed in, the daughter laid her head down onthe hard ground close at the father's side, and watched him.  Thedarkness deepened and deepened, and they both lay quiet, until alight gleamed through the chinks in the wall.Mr. Lorry and Monsieur Defarge had made all ready for the journey,and had brought with them, besides travelling cloaks and wrappers,bread and meat, wine, and hot coffee.  Monsieur Defarge put thisprovender, and the lamp he carried, on the shoemaker's bench (therewas nothing else in the garret but a pallet bed), and he andMr. Lorry roused the captive, and assisted him to his feet.No human intelligence could have read the mysteries of his mind, inthe scared blank wonder of his face.  Whether he knew what hadhappened, whether he recollected what they had said to him, whetherhe knew that he was free, were questions which no sagacity could havesolved.  They tried speaking to him; but, he was so confused, and sovery slow to answer, that they took fright at his bewilderment, andagreed for the time to tamper with him no more.  He had a wild, lostmanner of occasionally clasping his head in his hands, that had notbeen seen in him before; yet, he had some pleasure in the mere soundof his daughter's voice, and invariably turned to it when she spoke.In the submissive way of one long accustomed to obey under coercion,he ate and drank what they gave him to eat and drink, and put on thecloak and other wrappings, that they gave him to wear.  He readilyresponded to his daughter's drawing her arm through his, andtook--and kept--her hand in both his own.They began to descend; Monsieur Defarge going first with the lamp,Mr. Lorry closing the little procession.  They had not traversed manysteps of the long main staircase when he stopped, and stared at theroof and round at the wails."You remember the place, my father?  You remember coming up here?""What did you say?"But, before she could repeat the question, he murmured an answer asif she had repeated it."Remember?  No, I don't remember.  It was so very long ago."That he had no recollection whatever of his having been brought fromhis prison to that house, was apparent to them.  They heard him mutter,"One Hundred and Five, North Tower;" and when he looked about him, itevidently was for the strong fortress-walls which had long encompassed him.On their reaching the courtyard he instinctively altered his tread,as being in expectation of a drawbridge; and when there was nodrawbridge, and he saw the carriage waiting in the open street, hedropped his daughter's hand and clasped his head again.No crowd was about the door; no people were discernible at any of themany windows; not even a chance passerby was in the street.  An unnaturalsilence and desertion reigned there.  Only one soul was to be seen,and that was Madame Defarge--who leaned against the door-post,knitting, and saw nothing.The prisoner had got into a coach, and his daughter had followed him,when Mr. Lorry's feet were arrested on the step by his asking,miserably, for his shoemaking tools and the unfinished shoes.  MadameDefarge immediately called to her husband that she would get them,and went, knitting, out of the lamplight, through the courtyard.  Shequickly brought them down and handed them in;--and immediatelyafterwards leaned against the door-post, knitting, and saw nothing.Defarge got upon the box, and gave the word "To the Barrier!"The postilion cracked his whip, and they clattered away underthe feeble over-swinging lamps.Under the over-swinging lamps--swinging ever brighter in the betterstreets, and ever dimmer in the worse--and by lighted shops, gaycrowds, illuminated coffee-houses, and theatre-doors, to one of thecity gates.  Soldiers with lanterns, at the guard-house there."Your papers, travellers!"  "See here then, Monsieur the Officer,"said Defarge, getting down, and taking him gravely apart, "these arethe papers of monsieur inside, with the white head.  They wereconsigned to me, with him, at the--" He dropped his voice, there wasa flutter among the military lanterns, and one of them being handedinto the coach by an arm in uniform, the eyes connected with the armlooked, not an every day or an every night look, at monsieur with thewhite head.  "It is well.  Forward!" from the uniform.  "Adieu!" fromDefarge.  And so, under a short grove of feebler and feeblerover-swinging lamps, out under the great grove of stars.Beneath that arch of unmoved and eternal lights; some, so remote fromthis little earth that the learned tell us it is doubtful whethertheir rays have even yet discovered it, as a point in space whereanything is suffered or done:  the shadows of the night were broad andblack.  All through the cold and restless interval, until dawn, theyonce more whispered in the ears of Mr. Jarvis Lorry--sitting oppositethe buried man who had been dug out, and wondering what subtle powerswere for ever lost to him, and what were capable of restoration--theold inquiry:"I hope you care to be recalled to life?"And the old answer:"I can't say."The end of the first book.Book the Second--the Golden ThreadIFive Years LaterTellson's Bank by Temple Bar was an old-fashioned place, even in theyear one thousand seven hundred and eighty.  It was very small, verydark, very ugly, very incommodious.  It was an old-fashioned place,moreover, in the moral attribute that the partners in the House wereproud of its smallness, proud of its darkness, proud of its ugliness,proud of its incommodiousness.  They were even boastful of itseminence in those particulars, and were fired by an express convictionthat, if it were less objectionable, it would be less respectable.This was no passive belief, but an active weapon which they flashedat more convenient places of business.  Tellson's (they said) wantedno elbow-room, Tellson's wanted no light, Tellson's wanted noembellishment.  Noakes and Co.'s might, or Snooks Brothers' might;but Tellson's, thank Heaven!--Any one of these partners would have disinherited his son on thequestion of rebuilding Tellson's.  In this respect the House was muchon a par with the Country; which did very often disinherit its sonsfor suggesting improvements in laws and customs that had long beenhighly objectionable, but were only the more respectable.Thus it had come to pass, that Tellson's was the triumphantperfection of inconvenience.  After bursting open a door of idioticobstinacy with a weak rattle in its throat, you fell into Tellson'sdown two steps, and came to your senses in a miserable little shop,with two little counters, where the oldest of men made your chequeshake as if the wind rustled it, while they examined the signature bythe dingiest of windows, which were always under a shower-bath of mudfrom Fleet-street, and which were made the dingier by their own ironbars proper, and the heavy shadow of Temple Bar.  If your businessnecessitated your seeing "the House," you were put into a species ofCondemned Hold at the back, where you meditated on a misspent life,until the House came with its hands in its pockets, and you couldhardly blink at it in the dismal twilight.  Your money came out of,or went into, wormy old wooden drawers, particles of which flew upyour nose and down your throat when they were opened and shut.  Yourbank-notes had a musty odour, as if they were fast decomposing intorags again.  Your plate was stowed away among the neighbouringcesspools, and evil communications corrupted its good polish in a dayor two.  Your deeds got into extemporised strong-rooms made ofkitchens and sculleries, and fretted all the fat out of theirparchments into the banking-house air.  Your lighter boxes of familypapers went up-stairs into a Barmecide room, that always had a greatdining-table in it and never had a dinner, and where, even in theyear one thousand seven hundred and eighty, the first letters writtento you by your old love, or by your little children, were but newlyreleased from the horror of being ogled through the windows, by theheads exposed on Temple Bar with an insensate brutality and ferocityworthy of Abyssinia or Ashantee.But indeed, at that time, putting to death was a recipe much in voguewith all trades and professions, and not least of all with Tellson's.Death is Nature's remedy for all things, and why not Legislation's?Accordingly, the forger was put to Death; the utterer of a bad notewas put to Death; the unlawful opener of a letter was put to Death;the purloiner of forty shillings and sixpence was put to Death; theholder of a horse at Tellson's door, who made off with it, was put toDeath; the coiner of a bad shilling was put to Death; the sounders ofthree-fourths of the notes in the whole gamut of Crime, were put toDeath.  Not that it did the least good in the way of prevention--itmight almost have been worth remarking that the fact was exactly thereverse--but, it cleared off (as to this world) the trouble of eachparticular case, and left nothing else connected with it to be lookedafter.  Thus, Tellson's, in its day, like greater places of business,its contemporaries, had taken so many lives, that, if the heads laidlow before it had been ranged on Temple Bar instead of beingprivately disposed of, they would probably have excluded what littlelight the ground floor had, in a rather significant manner.Cramped in all kinds of dun cupboards and hutches at Tellson's, theoldest of men carried on the business gravely.  When they took ayoung man into Tellson's London house, they hid him somewhere till hewas old.  They kept him in a dark place, like a cheese, until he hadthe full Tellson flavour and blue-mould upon him.  Then only was hepermitted to be seen, spectacularly poring over large books, andcasting his breeches and gaiters into the general weight of theestablishment.Outside Tellson's--never by any means in it, unless called in--was anodd-job-man, an occasional porter and messenger, who served as thelive sign of the house.  He was never absent during business hours,unless upon an errand, and then he was represented by his son:  agrisly urchin of twelve, who was his express image.  Peopleunderstood that Tellson's, in a stately way, tolerated theodd-job-man.  The house had always tolerated some person in thatcapacity, and time and tide had drifted this person to the post.  Hissurname was Cruncher, and on the youthful occasion of his renouncingby proxy the works of darkness, in the easterly parish church ofHounsditch, he had received the added appellation of Jerry.The scene was Mr. Cruncher's private lodging in Hanging-sword-alley,Whitefriars:  the time, half-past seven of the clock on a windy Marchmorning, Anno Domini seventeen hundred and eighty.  (Mr. Cruncherhimself always spoke of the year of our Lord as Anna Dominoes:apparently under the impression that the Christian era dated from theinvention of a popular game, by a lady who had bestowed her name upon it.)Mr. Cruncher's apartments were not in a savoury neighbourhood, andwere but two in number, even if a closet with a single pane of glassin it might be counted as one.  But they were very decently kept.Early as it was, on the windy March morning, the room in which he layabed was already scrubbed throughout; and between the cups andsaucers arranged for breakfast, and the lumbering deal table, a veryclean white cloth was spread.Mr. Cruncher reposed under a patchwork counterpane, like a Harlequinat home.  At first, he slept heavily, but, by degrees, began to rolland surge in bed, until he rose above the surface, with his spikyhair looking as if it must tear the sheets to ribbons.  At whichjuncture, he exclaimed, in a voice of dire exasperation:"Bust me, if she ain't at it agin!"A woman of orderly and industrious appearance rose from her knees ina corner, with sufficient haste and trepidation to show that she wasthe person referred to."What!" said Mr. Cruncher, looking out of bed for a boot.  "You're atit agin, are you?"After hailing the mom with this second salutation, he threw a boot atthe woman as a third.  It was a very muddy boot, and may introducethe odd circumstance connected with Mr. Cruncher's domestic economy,that, whereas he often came home after banking hours with cleanboots, he often got up next morning to find the same bootscovered with clay."What," said Mr. Cruncher, varying his apostrophe after missinghis mark--"what are you up to, Aggerawayter?""I was only saying my prayers.""Saying your prayers!  You're a nice woman!  What do you mean byflopping yourself down and praying agin me?""I was not praying against you; I was praying for you.""You weren't.  And if you were, I won't be took the liberty with.Here! your mother's a nice woman, young Jerry, going a praying aginyour father's prosperity.  You've got a dutiful mother, you have, myson.  You've got a religious mother, you have, my boy:  going andflopping herself down, and praying that the bread-and-butter may besnatched out of the mouth of her only child."Master Cruncher (who was in his shirt) took this very ill, and,turning to his mother, strongly deprecated any praying away of hispersonal board."And what do you suppose, you conceited female," said Mr. Cruncher,with unconscious inconsistency, "that the worth of _your_ prayers may be?Name the price that you put _your_ prayers at!""They only come from the heart, Jerry.  They are worth no more than that.""Worth no more than that," repeated Mr. Cruncher. "They ain't worthmuch, then.  Whether or no, I won't be prayed agin, I tell you.I can't afford it. I'm not a going to be made unlucky by _your_sneaking. If you must go flopping yourself down, flop in favourof your husband and child, and not in opposition to 'em.  If Ihad had any but a unnat'ral wife, and this poor boy had had any buta unnat'ral mother, I might have made some money last week insteadof being counter-prayed and countermined and religiously circumwentedinto the worst of luck.  B-u-u-ust me!" said Mr. Cruncher, who allthis time had been putting on his clothes, "if I ain't, what withpiety and one blowed thing and another, been choused this last weekinto as bad luck as ever a poor devil of a honest tradesman met with!Young Jerry, dress yourself, my boy, and while I clean my boots keepa eye upon your mother now and then, and if you see any signs of moreflopping, give me a call.  For, I tell you," here he addressed hiswife once more, "I won't be gone agin, in this manner.  I am asrickety as a hackney-coach, I'm as sleepy as laudanum, my lines isstrained to that degree that I shouldn't know, if it wasn't for thepain in 'em, which was me and which somebody else, yet I'm none thebetter for it in pocket; and it's my suspicion that you've been at itfrom morning to night to prevent me from being the better for it in pocket,and I won't put up with it, Aggerawayter, and what do you say now!"Growling, in addition, such phrases as "Ah! yes!  You're religious, too.You wouldn't put yourself in opposition to the interests of your husbandand child, would you?  Not you!" and throwing off other sarcastic sparksfrom the whirling grindstone of his indignation, Mr. Cruncher betookhimself to his boot-cleaning and his general preparation for business.In the meantime, his son, whose head was garnished with tenderer spikes,and whose young eyes stood close by one another, as his father's did,kept the required watch upon his mother.  He greatly disturbed thatpoor woman at intervals, by darting out of his sleeping closet,where he made his toilet, with a suppressed cry of "You are going to flop,mother.  --Halloa, father!" and, after raising this fictitious alarm,darting in again with an undutiful grin.Mr. Cruncher's temper was not at all improved when he came to hisbreakfast.  He resented Mrs. Cruncher's saying grace with particularanimosity."Now, Aggerawayter!  What are you up to?  At it again?"His wife explained that she had merely "asked a blessing.""Don't do it!" said Mr. Crunches looking about, as if he ratherexpected to see the loaf disappear under the efficacy of his wife'spetitions.  "I ain't a going to be blest out of house and home.I won't have my wittles blest off my table.  Keep still!"Exceedingly red-eyed and grim, as if he had been up all night at aparty which had taken anything but a convivial turn, Jerry Cruncherworried his breakfast rather than ate it, growling over it like anyfour-footed inmate of a menagerie.  Towards nine o'clock he smoothedhis ruffled aspect, and, presenting as respectable and business-likean exterior as he could overlay his natural self with, issued forthto the occupation of the day.It could scarcely be called a trade, in spite of his favouritedescription of himself as "a honest tradesman."  His stock consistedof a wooden stool, made out of a broken-backed chair cut down, whichstool, young Jerry, walking at his father's side, carried everymorning to beneath the banking-house window that was nearest TempleBar:  where, with the addition of the first handful of straw thatcould be gleaned from any passing vehicle to keep the cold and wetfrom the odd-job-man's feet, it formed the encampment for the day.On this post of his, Mr. Cruncher was as well known to Fleet-streetand the Temple, as the Bar itself,--and was almost as in-looking.Encamped at a quarter before nine, in good time to touch his three-cornered hat to the oldest of men as they passed in to Tellson's,Jerry took up his station on this windy March morning, with youngJerry standing by him, when not engaged in making forays through theBar, to inflict bodily and mental injuries of an acute description onpassing boys who were small enough for his amiable purpose.  Fatherand son, extremely like each other, looking silently on at themorning traffic in Fleet-street, with their two heads as near to oneanother as the two eyes of each were, bore a considerable resemblanceto a pair of monkeys.  The resemblance was not lessened by theaccidental circumstance, that the mature Jerry bit and spat outstraw, while the twinkling eyes of the youthful Jerry were asrestlessly watchful of him as of everything else in Fleet-street.The head of one of the regular indoor messengers attached toTellson's establishment was put through the door, and the word wasgiven:"Porter wanted!""Hooray, father!  Here's an early job to begin with!"Having thus given his parent God speed, young Jerry seated himself onthe stool, entered on his reversionary interest in the straw hisfather had been chewing, and cogitated."Al-ways rusty!  His fingers is al-ways rusty!" muttered young Jerry."Where does my father get all that iron rust from?  He don't get noiron rust here!"IIA Sight"You know the Old Bailey, well, no doubt?" said one of the oldest ofclerks to Jerry the messenger."Ye-es, sir," returned Jerry, in something of a dogged manner.  "I_do_ know the Bailey.""Just so.  And you know Mr. Lorry.""I know Mr. Lorry, sir, much better than I know the Bailey.  Muchbetter," said Jerry, not unlike a reluctant witness at theestablishment in question, "than I, as a honest tradesman, wish toknow the Bailey.""Very well.  Find the door where the witnesses go in, and show thedoor-keeper this note for Mr. Lorry.  He will then let you in.""Into the court, sir?""Into the court."Mr. Cruncher's eyes seemed to get a little closer to one another, andto interchange the inquiry, "What do you think of this?""Am I to wait in the court, sir?" he asked, as the result of thatconference."I am going to tell you.  The door-keeper will pass the note to Mr.Lorry, and do you make any gesture that will attract Mr. Lorry'sattention, and show him where you stand.  Then what you have to do,is, to remain there until he wants you.""Is that all, sir?""That's all.  He wishes to have a messenger at hand.  This is to tellhim you are there."As the ancient clerk deliberately folded and superscribed the note,Mr. Cruncher, after surveying him in silence until he came to theblotting-paper stage, remarked:"I suppose they'll be trying Forgeries this morning?""Treason!""That's quartering," said Jerry.  "Barbarous!""It is the law," remarked the ancient clerk, turning his surprisedspectacles upon him.  "It is the law.""It's hard in the law to spile a man, I think.  Ifs hard enough tokill him, but it's wery hard to spile him, sir.""Not at all," retained the ancient clerk.  "Speak well of the law.Take care of your chest and voice, my good friend, and leave the lawto take care of itself.  I give you that advice.""It's the damp, sir, what settles on my chest and voice," said Jerry."I leave you to judge what a damp way of earning a living mine is.""Well, well," said the old clerk; "we all have our various ways ofgaining a livelihood.  Some of us have damp ways, and some of us havedry ways.  Here is the letter.  Go along."Jerry took the letter, and, remarking to himself with less internaldeference than he made an outward show of, "You are a lean old one,too," made his bow, informed his son, in passing, of his destination,and went his way.They hanged at Tyburn, in those days, so the street outside Newgatehad not obtained one infamous notoriety that has since attached toit.  But, the gaol was a vile place, in which most kinds ofdebauchery and villainy were practised, and where dire diseases werebred, that came into court with the prisoners, and sometimes rushedstraight from the dock at my Lord Chief Justice himself, and pulledhim off the bench.  It had more than once happened, that the Judge inthe black cap pronounced his own doom as certainly as the prisoner's,and even died before him.  For the rest, the Old Bailey was famous asa kind of deadly inn-yard, from which pale travellers set outcontinually, in carts and coaches, on a violent passage into theother world:  traversing some two miles and a half of public streetand road, and shaming few good citizens, if any.  So powerful is use,and so desirable to be good use in the beginning.  It was famous,too, for the pillory, a wise old institution, that inflicted apunishment of which no one could foresee the extent; also, for thewhipping-post, another dear old institution, very humanising andsoftening to behold in action; also, for extensive transactions inblood-money, another fragment of ancestral wisdom, systematicallyleading to the most frightful mercenary crimes that could becommitted under Heaven.  Altogether, the Old Bailey, at that date,was a choice illustration of the precept, that "Whatever is is right;"an aphorism that would be as final as it is lazy, did it not includethe troublesome consequence, that nothing that ever was, was wrong.Making his way through the tainted crowd, dispersed up and down thishideous scene of action, with the skill of a man accustomed to makehis way quietly, the messenger found out the door he sought, andhanded in his letter through a trap in it.  For, people then paid tosee the play at the Old Bailey, just as they paid to see the play inBedlam--only the former entertainment was much the dearer.  Therefore,all the Old Bailey doors were well guarded--except, indeed, thesocial doors by which the criminals got there, and those were alwaysleft wide open.After some delay and demur, the door grudgingly turned on its hingesa very little way, and allowed Mr. Jerry Cruncher to squeeze himselfinto court."What's on?" he asked, in a whisper, of the man he found himself next to."Nothing yet.""What's coming on?""The Treason case.""The quartering one, eh?""Ah!" returned the man, with a relish; "he'll be drawn on a hurdleto be half hanged, and then he'll be taken down and sliced beforehis own face, and then his inside will be taken out and burnt whilehe looks on, and then his head will be chopped off, and he'll becut into quarters.  That's the sentence.""If he's found Guilty, you mean to say?" Jerry added, by way of proviso."Oh! they'll find him guilty," said the other.  "Don't you be afraid of that."Mr. Cruncher's attention was here diverted to the door-keeper, whomhe saw making his way to Mr. Lorry, with the note in his hand.  Mr.Lorry sat at a table, among the gentlemen in wigs:  not far from awigged gentleman, the prisoner's counsel, who had a great bundle ofpapers before him:  and nearly opposite another wigged gentleman withhis hands in his pockets, whose whole attention, when Mr. Cruncherlooked at him then or afterwards, seemed to be concentrated on theceiling of the court.  After some gruff coughing and rubbing of hischin and signing with his hand, Jerry attracted the notice ofMr. Lorry, who had stood up to look for him, and who quietly noddedand sat down again."What's _he_ got to do with the case?" asked the man he had spoken with."Blest if I know," said Jerry."What have _you_ got to do with it, then, if a person may inquire?""Blest if I know that either," said Jerry.The entrance of the Judge, and a consequent great stir and settlingdown in the court, stopped the dialogue.  Presently, the dock becamethe central point of interest.  Two gaolers, who had been standingthere, went out, and the prisoner was brought in, and put to the bar.Everybody present, except the one wigged gentleman who looked at theceiling, stared at him.  All the human breath in the place, rolled athim, like a sea, or a wind, or a fire.  Eager faces strained roundpillars and corners, to get a sight of him; spectators in back rowsstood up, not to miss a hair of him; people on the floor of thecourt, laid their hands on the shoulders of the people before them,to help themselves, at anybody's cost, to a view of him--stooda-tiptoe, got upon ledges, stood upon next to nothing, to see everyinch of him.  Conspicuous among these latter, like an animated bit ofthe spiked wall of Newgate, Jerry stood:  aiming at the prisoner thebeery breath of a whet he had taken as he came along, and dischargingit to mingle with the waves of other beer, and gin, and tea, andcoffee, and what not, that flowed at him, and already broke upon thegreat windows behind him in an impure mist and rain.The object of all this staring and blaring, was a young man of aboutfive-and-twenty, well-grown and well-looking, with a sunburnt cheekand a dark eye.  His condition was that of a young gentleman.  He wasplainly dressed in black, or very dark grey, and his hair, which waslong and dark, was gathered in a ribbon at the back of his neck; moreto be out of his way than for ornament.  As an emotion of the mindwill express itself through any covering of the body, so the palenesswhich his situation engendered came through the brown upon his cheek,showing the soul to be stronger than the sun.  He was otherwise quiteself-possessed, bowed to the Judge, and stood quiet.The sort of interest with which this man was stared and breathed at,was not a sort that elevated humanity.  Had he stood in peril of aless horrible sentence--had there been a chance of any one of itssavage details being spared--by just so much would he have lost inhis fascination.  The form that was to be doomed to be so shamefullymangled, was the sight; the immortal creature that was to be sobutchered and torn asunder, yielded the sensation.  Whatever glossthe various spectators put upon the interest, according to theirseveral arts and powers of self-deceit, the interest was, at theroot of it, Ogreish.Silence in the court!  Charles Darnay had yesterday pleaded Not Guiltyto an indictment denouncing him (with infinite jingle and jangle) forthat he was a false traitor to our serene, illustrious, excellent,and so forth, prince, our Lord the King, by reason of his having, ondivers occasions, and by divers means and ways, assisted Lewis, theFrench King, in his wars against our said serene, illustrious,excellent, and so forth; that was to say, by coming and going,between the dominions of our said serene, illustrious, excellent, andso forth, and those of the said French Lewis, and wickedly, falsely,traitorously, and otherwise evil-adverbiously, revealing to the saidFrench Lewis what forces our said serene, illustrious, excellent, andso forth, had in preparation to send to Canada and North America.This much, Jerry, with his head becoming more and more spiky as thelaw terms bristled it, made out with huge satisfaction, and soarrived circuitously at the understanding that the aforesaid, andover and over again aforesaid, Charles Darnay, stood there before himupon his trial; that the jury were swearing in; and thatMr. Attorney-General was making ready to speak.The accused, who was (and who knew he was) being mentally hanged,beheaded, and quartered, by everybody there, neither flinched fromthe situation, nor assumed any theatrical air in it.  He was quietand attentive; watched the opening proceedings with a grave interest;and stood with his hands resting on the slab of wood before him, socomposedly, that they had not displaced a leaf of the herbs withwhich it was strewn.  The court was all bestrewn with herbs andsprinkled with vinegar, as a precaution against gaol air and gaolfever.Over the prisoner's head there was a mirror, to throw the light downupon him.  Crowds of the wicked and the wretched had been reflectedin it, and had passed from its surface and this earth's together.Haunted in a most ghastly manner that abominable place would havebeen, if the glass could ever have rendered back its reflections, asthe ocean is one day to give up its dead.  Some passing thought ofthe infamy and disgrace for which it had been reserved, may havestruck the prisoner's mind.  Be that as it may, a change in hisposition making him conscious of a bar of light across his face, helooked up; and when he saw the glass his face flushed, and his righthand pushed the herbs away.It happened, that the action turned his face to that side of the courtwhich was on his left.  About on a level with his eyes, there sat, inthat corner of the Judge's bench, two persons upon whom his lookimmediately rested; so immediately, and so much to the changing of hisaspect, that all the eyes that were turned upon him, turned to them.The spectators saw in the two figures, a young lady of little morethan twenty, and a gentleman who was evidently her father; a man ofa very remarkable appearance in respect of the absolute whitenessof his hair, and a certain indescribable intensity of face:  not ofan active kind, but pondering and self-communing.  When this expressionwas upon him, he looked as if he were old; but when it was stirredand broken up--as it was now, in a moment, on his speaking to hisdaughter--he became a handsome man, not past the prime of life.His daughter had one of her hands drawn through his arm, as she satby him, and the other pressed upon it.  She had drawn close to him,in her dread of the scene, and in her pity for the prisoner.  Herforehead had been strikingly expressive of an engrossing terror andcompassion that saw nothing but the peril of the accused.  This hadbeen so very noticeable, so very powerfully and naturally shown, thatstarers who had had no pity for him were touched by her; and thewhisper went about, "Who are they?"Jerry, the messenger, who had made his own observations, in his ownmanner, and who had been sucking the rust off his fingers in hisabsorption, stretched his neck to hear who they were.  The crowdabout him had pressed and passed the inquiry on to the nearestattendant, and from him it had been more slowly pressed and passedback; at last it got to Jerry:"Witnesses.""For which side?""Against.""Against what side?""The prisoner's."The Judge, whose eyes had gone in the general direction, recalledthem, leaned back in his seat, and looked steadily at the man whoselife was in his hand, as Mr. Attorney-General rose to spin the rope,grind the axe, and hammer the nails into the scaffold.IIIA DisappointmentMr. Attorney-General had to inform the jury, that the prisoner beforethem, though young in years, was old in the treasonable practiceswhich claimed the forfeit of his life.  That this correspondence withthe public enemy was not a correspondence of to-day, or of yesterday,or even of last year, or of the year before.  That, it was certainthe prisoner had, for longer than that, been in the habit of passingand repassing between France and England, on secret business of whichhe could give no honest account.  That, if it were in the nature oftraitorous ways to thrive (which happily it never was), the realwickedness and guilt of his business might have remained undiscovered.That Providence, however, had put it into the heart of a person whowas beyond fear and beyond reproach, to ferret out the nature of theprisoner's schemes, and, struck with horror, to disclose them to hisMajesty's Chief Secretary of State and most honourable Privy Council.That, this patriot would be produced before them.  That, his positionand attitude were, on the whole, sublime.  That, he had been theprisoner's friend, but, at once in an auspicious and an evil hourdetecting his infamy, had resolved to immolate the traitor he couldno longer cherish in his bosom, on the sacred altar of his country.That, if statues were decreed in Britain, as in ancient Greece andRome, to public benefactors, this shining citizen would assuredlyhave had one.  That, as they were not so decreed, he probably wouldnot have one.  That, Virtue, as had been observed by the poets (inmany passages which he well knew the jury would have, word for word,at the tips of their tongues; whereat the jury's countenancesdisplayed a guilty consciousness that they knew nothing about thepassages), was in a manner contagious; more especially the brightvirtue known as patriotism, or love of country.  That, the loftyexample of this immaculate and unimpeachable witness for the Crown,to refer to whom however unworthily was an honour, had communicateditself to the prisoner's servant, and had engendered in him a holydetermination to examine his master's table-drawers and pockets, andsecrete his papers.  That, he (Mr. Attorney-General) was prepared tohear some disparagement attempted of this admirable servant; but that,in a general way, he preferred him to his (Mr. Attorney-General's)brothers and sisters, and honoured him more than his(Mr. Attorney-General's) father and mother.  That, he called withconfidence on the jury to come and do likewise.  That, the evidenceof these two witnesses, coupled with the documents of theirdiscovering that would be produced, would show the prisoner to havebeen furnished with lists of his Majesty's forces, and of theirdisposition and preparation, both by sea and land, and would leave nodoubt that he had habitually conveyed such information to a hostilepower.  That, these lists could not be proved to be in the prisoner'shandwriting; but that it was all the same; that, indeed, it wasrather the better for the prosecution, as showing the prisoner to beartful in his precautions.  That, the proof would go back five years,and would show the prisoner already engaged in these perniciousmissions, within a few weeks before the date of the very first actionfought between the British troops and the Americans.  That, for thesereasons, the jury, being a loyal jury (as he knew they were), andbeing a responsible jury (as _they_ knew they were), must positivelyfind the prisoner Guilty, and make an end of him, whether they likedit or not.  That, they never could lay their heads upon their pillows;that, they never could tolerate the idea of their wives laying theirheads upon their pillows; that, they never could endure the notion oftheir children laying their heads upon their pillows; in short, thatthere never more could be, for them or theirs, any laying of headsupon pillows at all, unless the prisoner's head was taken off.  Thathead Mr. Attorney-General concluded by demanding of them, in the nameof everything he could think of with a round turn in it, and on thefaith of his solemn asseveration that he already considered theprisoner as good as dead and gone.When the Attorney-General ceased, a buzz arose in the court as ifa cloud of great blue-flies were swarming about the prisoner, inanticipation of what he was soon to become.  When toned down again,the unimpeachable patriot appeared in the witness-box.Mr. Solicitor-General then, following his leader's lead, examinedthe patriot:  John Barsad, gentleman, by name.  The story of his puresoul was exactly what Mr. Attorney-General had described it to be--perhaps, if it had a fault, a little too exactly.  Having releasedhis noble bosom of its burden, he would have modestly withdrawnhimself, but that the wigged gentleman with the papers before him,sitting not far from Mr. Lorry, begged to ask him a few questions.The wigged gentleman sitting opposite, still looking at the ceilingof the court.Had he ever been a spy himself?  No, he scorned the base insinuation.What did he live upon?  His property.  Where was his property?He didn't precisely remember where it was.  What was it?  No businessof anybody's.  Had he inherited it?  Yes, he had.  From whom?  Distantrelation.  Very distant?  Rather.  Ever been in prison?  Certainly not.Never in a debtors' prison?  Didn't see what that had to do with it.Never in a debtors' prison?--Come, once again.  Never?  Yes.  How manytimes?  Two or three times.  Not five or six?  Perhaps.  Of whatprofession?  Gentleman.  Ever been kicked?  Might have been.  Frequently?No. Ever kicked downstairs?  Decidedly not; once received a kick on thetop of a staircase, and fell downstairs of his own accord.  Kicked onthat occasion for cheating at dice?  Something to that effect was saidby the intoxicated liar who committed the assault, but it was nottrue.  Swear it was not true?  Positively.  Ever live by cheating atplay?  Never.  Ever live by play?  Not more than other gentlemen do.Ever borrow money of the prisoner?  Yes.  Ever pay him?  No.  Was notthis intimacy with the prisoner, in reality a very slight one, forcedupon the prisoner in coaches, inns, and packets?  No.  Sure he sawthe prisoner with these lists?  Certain.  Knew no more about the lists?No.  Had not procured them himself, for instance?  No.  Expect to getanything by this evidence?  No.  Not in regular government pay andemployment, to lay traps?  Oh dear no.  Or to do anything?  Oh dear no.Swear that?  Over and over again.  No motives but motives of sheerpatriotism? None whatever.The virtuous servant, Roger Cly, swore his way through the case at agreat rate.  He had taken service with the prisoner, in good faithand simplicity, four years ago.  He had asked the prisoner, aboardthe Calais packet, if he wanted a handy fellow, and the prisoner hadengaged him.  He had not asked the prisoner to take the handy fellowas an act of charity--never thought of such a thing.  He began tohave suspicions of the prisoner, and to keep an eye upon him, soonafterwards.  In arranging his clothes, while travelling, he had seensimilar lists to these in the prisoner's pockets, over and over again.He had taken these lists from the drawer of the prisoner's desk.He had not put them there first.  He had seen the prisoner show theseidentical lists to French gentlemen at Calais, and similar lists toFrench gentlemen, both at Calais and Boulogne.  He loved his country,and couldn't bear it, and had given information.  He had never beensuspected of stealing a silver tea-pot; he had been maligned respectinga mustard-pot, but it turned out to be only a plated one.  He hadknown the last witness seven or eight years; that was merely acoincidence.  He didn't call it a particularly curious coincidence;most coincidences were curious.  Neither did he call it a curiouscoincidence that true patriotism was _his_ only motive too.  He was atrue Briton, and hoped there were many like him.The blue-flies buzzed again, and Mr. Attorney-General called Mr. Jarvis Lorry."Mr. Jarvis Lorry, are you a clerk in Tellson's bank?""I am.""On a certain Friday night in November one thousand seven hundred andseventy-five, did business occasion you to travel between London andDover by the mail?""It did.""Were there any other passengers in the mail?""Two.""Did they alight on the road in the course of the night?""They did.""Mr. Lorry, look upon the prisoner.  Was he one of those two passengers?""I cannot undertake to say that he was.""Does he resemble either of these two passengers?""Both were so wrapped up, and the night was so dark, and we were allso reserved, that I cannot undertake to say even that.""Mr. Lorry, look again upon the prisoner.  Supposing him wrapped upas those two passengers were, is there anything in his bulk andstature to render it unlikely that he was one of them?""No.""You will not swear, Mr. Lorry, that he was not one of them?""No.""So at least you say he may have been one of them?""Yes.  Except that I remember them both to have been--like myself--timorous of highwaymen, and the prisoner has not a timorous air.""Did you ever see a counterfeit of timidity, Mr. Lorry?""I certainly have seen that.""Mr. Lorry, look once more upon the prisoner.  Have you seen him,to your certain knowledge, before?""I have.""When?""I was returning from France a few days afterwards, and, at Calais,the prisoner came on board the packet-ship in which I returned, andmade the voyage with me.""At what hour did he come on board?""At a little after midnight.""In the dead of the night.  Was he the only passenger who came onboard at that untimely hour?""He happened to be the only one.""Never mind about `happening,' Mr. Lorry.  He was the only passengerwho came on board in the dead of the night?""He was.""Were you travelling alone, Mr. Lorry, or with any companion?""With two companions.  A gentleman and lady.  They are here.""They are here.  Had you any conversation with the prisoner?""Hardly any.  The weather was stormy, and the passage long and rough,and I lay on a sofa, almost from shore to shore.""Miss Manette!"The young lady, to whom all eyes had been turned before, and were nowturned again, stood up where she had sat.  Her father rose with her,and kept her hand drawn through his arm."Miss Manette, look upon the prisoner."To be confronted with such pity, and such earnest youth and beauty,was far more trying to the accused than to be confronted with all thecrowd.  Standing, as it were, apart with her on the edge of his grave,not all the staring curiosity that looked on, could, for the moment,nerve him to remain quite still.  His hurried right hand parcelledout the herbs before him into imaginary beds of flowers in a garden;and his efforts to control and steady his breathing shook the lipsfrom which the colour rushed to his heart.  The buzz of the greatflies was loud again."Miss Manette, have you seen the prisoner before?""Yes, sir.""Where?""On board of the packet-ship just now referred to, sir, and on thesame occasion.""You are the young lady just now referred to?""O! most unhappily, I am!"The plaintive tone of her compassion merged into the less musicalvoice of the Judge, as he said something fiercely: "Answer thequestions put to you, and make no remark upon them.""Miss Manette, had you any conversation with the prisoner on thatpassage across the Channel?""Yes, sir.""Recall it."In the midst of a profound stillness, she faintly began:  "When thegentleman came on board--""Do you mean the prisoner?" inquired the Judge, knitting his brows."Yes, my Lord.""Then say the prisoner.""When the prisoner came on board, he noticed that my father," turningher eyes lovingly to him as he stood beside her, "was much fatiguedand in a very weak state of health.  My father was so reduced that Iwas afraid to take him out of the air, and I had made a bed for himon the deck near the cabin steps, and I sat on the deck at his sideto take care of him.  There were no other passengers that night, butwe four.  The prisoner was so good as to beg permission to advise mehow I could shelter my father from the wind and weather, better thanI had done.  I had not known how to do it well, not understanding howthe wind would set when we were out of the harbour.  He did it for me.He expressed great gentleness and kindness for my father's state, andI am sure he felt it.  That was the manner of our beginning to speaktogether.""Let me interrupt you for a moment.  Had he come on board alone?""No.""How many were with him?""Two French gentlemen.""Had they conferred together?""They had conferred together until the last moment, when it wasnecessary for the French gentlemen to be landed in their boat.""Had any papers been handed about among them, similar to these lists?""Some papers had been handed about among them, but I don't know whatpapers.""Like these in shape and size?""Possibly, but indeed I don't know, although they stood whisperingvery near to me:  because they stood at the top of the cabin steps tohave the light of the lamp that was hanging there; it was a dull lamp,and they spoke very low, and I did not hear what they said, and sawonly that they looked at papers.""Now, to the prisoner's conversation, Miss Manette.""The prisoner was as open in his confidence with me--which arose outof my helpless situation--as he was kind, and good, and useful to myfather.  I hope," bursting into tears, "I may not repay him by doinghim harm to-day."Buzzing from the blue-flies."Miss Manette, if the prisoner does not perfectly understand that yougive the evidence which it is your duty to give--which you must give--and which you cannot escape from giving--with great unwillingness,he is the only person present in that condition.  Please to go on.""He told me that he was travelling on business of a delicate anddifficult nature, which might get people into trouble, and that hewas therefore travelling under an assumed name.  He said that thisbusiness had, within a few days, taken him to France, and might,at intervals, take him backwards and forwards between France andEngland for a long time to come.""Did he say anything about America, Miss Manette?  Be particular.""He tried to explain to me how that quarrel had arisen, and he said that,so far as he could judge, it was a wrong and foolish one on England'spart.  He added, in a jesting way, that perhaps George Washingtonmight gain almost as great a name in history as George the Third.But there was no harm in his way of saying this:  it was said laughingly,and to beguile the time."Any strongly marked expression of face on the part of a chief actorin a scene of great interest to whom many eyes are directed, will beunconsciously imitated by the spectators.  Her forehead was painfullyanxious and intent as she gave this evidence, and, in the pauses whenshe stopped for the Judge to write it down, watched its effect uponthe counsel for and against.  Among the lookers-on there was the sameexpression in all quarters of the court; insomuch, that a greatmajority of the foreheads there, might have been mirrors reflectingthe witness, when the Judge looked up from his notes to glare at thattremendous heresy about George Washington.Mr. Attorney-General now signified to my Lord, that he deemed itnecessary, as a matter of precaution and form, to call the younglady's father, Doctor Manette.  Who was called accordingly."Doctor Manette, look upon the prisoner.  Have you ever seen him before?""Once.  When he called at my lodgings in London.  Some three years, orthree years and a half ago.""Can you identify him as your fellow-passenger on board the packet,or speak to his conversation with your daughter?""Sir, I can do neither.""Is there any particular and special reason for your being unable todo either?"He answered, in a low voice, "There is.""Has it been your misfortune to undergo a long imprisonment, withouttrial, or even accusation, in your native country, Doctor Manette?"He answered, in a tone that went to every heart, "A long imprisonment.""Were you newly released on the occasion in question?""They tell me so.""Have you no remembrance of the occasion?""None.  My mind is a blank, from some time--I cannot even say what time--when I employed myself, in my captivity, in making shoes,to the time when I found myself living in London with my deardaughter here.  She had become familiar to me, when a gracious Godrestored my faculties; but, I am quite unable even to say how shehad become familiar.  I have no remembrance of the process."Mr. Attorney-General sat down, and the father and daughter sat downtogether.A singular circumstance then arose in the case.  The object in handbeing to show that the prisoner went down, with some fellow-plotteruntracked, in the Dover mail on that Friday night in November fiveyears ago, and got out of the mail in the night, as a blind, at aplace where he did not remain, but from which he travelled back somedozen miles or more, to a garrison and dockyard, and there collectedinformation; a witness was called to identify him as having been atthe precise time required, in the coffee-room of an hotel in thatgarrison-and-dockyard town, waiting for another person.  The prisoner'scounsel was cross-examining this witness with no result, except thathe had never seen the prisoner on any other occasion, when the wiggedgentleman who had all this time been looking at the ceiling of thecourt, wrote a word or two on a little piece of paper, screwed it up,and tossed it to him.  Opening this piece of paper in the next pause,the counsel looked with great attention and curiosity at the prisoner."You say again you are quite sure that it was the prisoner?"The witness was quite sure."Did you ever see anybody very like the prisoner?"Not so like (the witness said) as that he could be mistaken."Look well upon that gentleman, my learned friend there," pointing tohim who had tossed the paper over, "and then look well upon the prisoner.How say you?  Are they very like each other?"Allowing for my learned friend's appearance being careless andslovenly if not debauched, they were sufficiently like each other tosurprise, not only the witness, but everybody present, when they werethus brought into comparison.  My Lord being prayed to bid my learnedfriend lay aside his wig, and giving no very gracious consent, thelikeness became much more remarkable.  My Lord inquired of Mr. Stryver(the prisoner's counsel), whether they were next to try Mr. Carton(name of my learned friend) for treason?  But, Mr. Stryver replied tomy Lord, no; but he would ask the witness to tell him whether whathappened once, might happen twice; whether he would have been soconfident if he had seen this illustration of his rashness sooner,whether he would be so confident, having seen it; and more.The upshot of which, was, to smash this witness like a crockery vessel,and shiver his part of the case to useless lumber.Mr. Cruncher had by this time taken quite a lunch of rust off hisfingers in his following of the evidence.  He had now to attend whileMr. Stryver fitted the prisoner's case on the jury, like a compactsuit of clothes; showing them how the patriot, Barsad, was a hired spyand traitor, an unblushing trafficker in blood, and one of the greatestscoundrels upon earth since accursed Judas--which he certainly didlook rather like.  How the virtuous servant, Cly, was his friend andpartner, and was worthy to be; how the watchful eyes of those forgersand false swearers had rested on the prisoner as a victim, becausesome family affairs in France, he being of French extraction, didrequire his making those passages across the Channel--though whatthose affairs were, a consideration for others who were near and dearto him, forbade him, even for his life, to disclose.  How the evidencethat had been warped and wrested from the young lady, whose anguish ingiving it they had witnessed, came to nothing, involving the merelittle innocent gallantries and politenesses likely to pass betweenany young gentleman and young lady so thrown together;--with theexception of that reference to George Washington, which was altogethertoo extravagant and impossible to be regarded in any other light thanas a monstrous joke.  How it would be a weakness in the government tobreak down in this attempt to practise for popularity on the lowestnational antipathies and fears, and therefore Mr. Attorney-General hadmade the most of it; how, nevertheless, it rested upon nothing, savethat vile and infamous character of evidence too often disfiguringsuch cases, and of which the State Trials of this country were full.But, there my Lord interposed (with as grave a face as if it had notbeen true), saying that he could not sit upon that Bench and sufferthose allusions.Mr. Stryver then called his few witnesses, and Mr. Cruncher had nextto attend while Mr. Attorney-General turned the whole suit of clothesMr. Stryver had fitted on the jury, inside out; showing how Barsad andCly were even a hundred times better than he had thought them, and theprisoner a hundred times worse.  Lastly, came my Lord himself, turningthe suit of clothes, now inside out, now outside in, but on the wholedecidedly trimming and shaping them into grave-clothes for theprisoner.And now, the jury turned to consider, and the great flies swarmed again.Mr. Carton, who had so long sat looking at the ceiling of the court,changed neither his place nor his attitude, even in this excitement.While his teamed friend, Mr. Stryver, massing his papers before him,whispered with those who sat near, and from time to time glancedanxiously at the jury; while all the spectators moved more or less,and grouped themselves anew; while even my Lord himself arose from hisseat, and slowly paced up and down his platform, not unattended by asuspicion in the minds of the audience that his state was feverish;this one man sat leaning back, with his torn gown half off him, hisuntidy wig put on just as it had happened to fight on his head afterits removal, his hands in his pockets, and his eyes on the ceiling asthey had been all day.  Something especially reckless in his demeanour,not only gave him a disreputable look, but so diminished the strongresemblance he undoubtedly bore to the prisoner (which his momentaryearnestness, when they were compared together, had strengthened),that many of the lookers-on, taking note of him now, said to oneanother they would hardly have thought the two were so alike.Mr. Cruncher made the observation to his next neighbour, and added,"I'd hold half a guinea that _he_ don't get no law-work to do.Don't look like the sort of one to get any, do he?"Yet, this Mr. Carton took in more of the details of the scene than heappeared to take in; for now, when Miss Manette's head dropped uponher father's breast, he was the first to see it, and to say audibly:"Officer! look to that young lady.  Help the gentleman to take her out.Don't you see she will fall!"There was much commiseration for her as she was removed, and muchsympathy with her father.  It had evidently been a great distress tohim, to have the days of his imprisonment recalled.  He had shownstrong internal agitation when he was questioned, and that ponderingor brooding look which made him old, had been upon him, like a heavycloud, ever since.  As he passed out, the jury, who had turned backand paused a moment, spoke, through their foreman.They were not agreed, and wished to retire.  My Lord (perhaps withGeorge Washington on his mind) showed some surprise that they were notagreed, but signified his pleasure that they should retire under watchand ward, and retired himself.  The trial had lasted all day, and thelamps in the court were now being lighted.  It began to be rumouredthat the jury would be out a long while.  The spectators dropped offto get refreshment, and the prisoner withdrew to the back of the dock,and sat down.Mr. Lorry, who had gone out when the young lady and her father went out,now reappeared, and beckoned to Jerry:  who, in the slackened interest,could easily get near him."Jerry, if you wish to take something to eat, you can.  But, keep inthe way.  You will be sure to hear when the jury come in.  Don't be amoment behind them, for I want you to take the verdict back to the bank.You are the quickest messenger I know, and will get to Temple Bar longbefore I can."Jerry had just enough forehead to knuckle, and he knuckled it inacknowledgment of this communication and a shilling.  Mr. Carton cameup at the moment, and touched Mr. Lorry on the arm."How is the young lady?""She is greatly distressed; but her father is comforting her, and shefeels the better for being out of court.""I'll tell the prisoner so.  It won't do for a respectable bankgentleman like you, to be seen speaking to him publicly, you know."Mr. Lorry reddened as if he were conscious of having debated the pointin his mind, and Mr. Carton made his way to the outside of the bar.The way out of court lay in that direction, and Jerry followed him,all eyes, ears, and spikes."Mr. Darnay!"The prisoner came forward directly."You will naturally be anxious to hear of the witness, Miss Manette.She will do very well.  You have seen the worst of her agitation.""I am deeply sorry to have been the cause of it.  Could you tell herso for me, with my fervent acknowledgments?""Yes, I could.  I will, if you ask it."Mr. Carton's manner was so careless as to be almost insolent.  He stood,half turned from the prisoner, lounging with his elbow against the bar."I do ask it.  Accept my cordial thanks.""What," said Carton, still only half turned towards him, "do youexpect, Mr. Darnay?""The worst.""It's the wisest thing to expect, and the likeliest.  But I thinktheir withdrawing is in your favour."Loitering on the way out of court not being allowed, Jerry heard nomore:  but left them--so like each other in feature, so unlike eachother in manner--standing side by side, both reflected in the glassabove them.An hour and a half limped heavily away in the thief-and-rascal crowdedpassages below, even though assisted off with mutton pies and ale.The hoarse messenger, uncomfortably seated on a form after taking thatrefection, had dropped into a doze, when a loud murmur and a rapidtide of people setting up the stairs that led to the court, carriedhim along with them."Jerry!  Jerry!"  Mr. Lorry was already calling at the door whenhe got there."Here, sir!  It's a fight to get back again.  Here I am, sir!"Mr. Lorry handed him a paper through the throng."Quick!  Have you got it?""Yes, sir."Hastily written on the paper was the word "AQUITTED.""If you had sent the message, `Recalled to Life,' again," mutteredJerry, as he turned, "I should have known what you meant, this time."He had no opportunity of saying, or so much as thinking, anythingelse, until he was clear of the Old Bailey; for, the crowd camepouring out with a vehemence that nearly took him off his legs, and aloud buzz swept into the street as if the baffled blue-flies weredispersing in search of other carrion.IVCongratulatoryFrom the dimly-lighted passages of the court, the last sediment of thehuman stew that had been boiling there all day, was straining off,when Doctor Manette, Lucie Manette, his daughter, Mr. Lorry, thesolicitor for the defence, and its counsel, Mr. Stryver, stoodgathered round Mr. Charles Darnay--just released--congratulating himon his escape from death.It would have been difficult by a far brighter light, to recognise inDoctor Manette, intellectual of face and upright of bearing, theshoemaker of the garret in Paris.  Yet, no one could have looked athim twice, without looking again:  even though the opportunity ofobservation had not extended to the mournful cadence of his low gravevoice, and to the abstraction that overclouded him fitfully, withoutany apparent reason.  While one external cause, and that a referenceto his long lingering agony, would always--as on the trial--evoke thiscondition from the depths of his soul, it was also in its nature toarise of itself, and to draw a gloom over him, as incomprehensible tothose unacquainted with his story as if they had seen the shadow ofthe actual Bastille thrown upon him by a summer sun, when thesubstance was three hundred miles away.Only his daughter had the power of charming this black brooding fromhis mind.  She was the golden thread that united him to a Past beyondhis misery, and to a Present beyond his misery:  and the sound of hervoice, the light of her face, the touch of her hand, had a strongbeneficial influence with him almost always.  Not absolutely always,for she could recall some occasions on which her power had failed;but they were few and slight, and she believed them over.Mr. Darnay had kissed her hand fervently and gratefully, and hadturned to Mr. Stryver, whom he warmly thanked.  Mr. Stryver, a man oflittle more than thirty, but looking twenty years older than he was,stout, loud, red, bluff, and free from any drawback of delicacy,had a pushing way of shouldering himself (morally and physically)into companies and conversations, that argued well for his shoulderinghis way up in life.He still had his wig and gown on, and he said, squaring himself at hislate client to that degree that he squeezed the innocent Mr. Lorryclean out of the group:  "I am glad to have brought you off with honour,Mr. Darnay.  It was an infamous prosecution, grossly infamous;but not the less likely to succeed on that account.""You have laid me under an obligation to you for life--in two senses,"said his late client, taking his hand."I have done my best for you, Mr. Darnay; and my best is as good asanother man's, I believe."It clearly being incumbent on some one to say, "Much better," Mr. Lorrysaid it; perhaps not quite disinterestedly, but with the interestedobject of squeezing himself back again."You think so?" said Mr. Stryver.  "Well! you have been present all day,and you ought to know.  You are a man of business, too.""And as such," quoth Mr. Lorry, whom the counsel learned in the lawhad now shouldered back into the group, just as he had previouslyshouldered him out of it--"as such I will appeal to Doctor Manette,to break up this conference and order us all to our homes.Miss Lucie looks ill, Mr. Darnay has had a terrible day, we are worn out.""Speak for yourself, Mr. Lorry," said Stryver; "I have a night's workto do yet.  Speak for yourself.""I speak for myself," answered Mr. Lorry, "and for Mr. Darnay, and forMiss Lucie, and--Miss Lucie, do you not think I may speak for us all?"He asked her the question pointedly, and with a glance at her father.His face had become frozen, as it were, in a very curious look atDarnay:  an intent look, deepening into a frown of dislike and distrust,not even unmixed with fear.  With this strange expression on him histhoughts had wandered away."My father," said Lucie, softly laying her hand on his.He slowly shook the shadow off, and turned to her."Shall we go home, my father?"With a long breath, he answered "Yes."The friends of the acquitted prisoner had dispersed, under theimpression--which he himself had originated--that he would not bereleased that night.  The lights were nearly all extinguished in thepassages, the iron gates were being closed with a jar and a rattle,and the dismal place was deserted until to-morrow morning's interestof gallows, pillory, whipping-post, and branding-iron, should repeopleit.  Walking between her father and Mr. Darnay, Lucie Manette passedinto the open air.  A hackney-coach was called, and the father anddaughter departed in it.Mr. Stryver had left them in the passages, to shoulder his way backto the robing-room.  Another person, who had not joined the group,or interchanged a word with any one of them, but who had been leaningagainst the wall where its shadow was darkest, had silently strolledout after the rest, and had looked on until the coach drove away.He now stepped up to where Mr. Lorry and Mr. Darnay stood upon thepavement."So, Mr. Lorry!  Men of business may speak to Mr. Darnay now?"Nobody had made any acknowledgment of Mr. Carton's part in the day'sproceedings; nobody had known of it.  He was unrobed, and was nonethe better for it in appearance."If you knew what a conflict goes on in the business mind, when thebusiness mind is divided between good-natured impulse and businessappearances, you would be amused, Mr. Darnay."Mr. Lorry reddened, and said, warmly, "You have mentioned that before,sir.  We men of business, who serve a House, are not our own masters.We have to think of the House more than ourselves.""_I_ know, _I_ know," rejoined Mr. Carton, carelessly.  "Don't benettled, Mr. Lorry.  You are as good as another, I have no doubt:better, I dare say.""And indeed, sir," pursued Mr. Lorry, not minding him, "I reallydon't know what you have to do with the matter.  If you'll excuse me,as very much your elder, for saying so, I really don't know that it isyour business.""Business!  Bless you, _I_ have no business," said Mr. Carton."It is a pity you have not, sir.""I think so, too.""If you had," pursued Mr. Lorry, "perhaps you would attend to it.""Lord love you, no!--I shouldn't," said Mr. Carton."Well, sir!" cried Mr. Lorry, thoroughly heated by his indifference,"business is a very good thing, and a very respectable thing.  And, sir,if business imposes its restraints and its silences and impediments,Mr. Darnay as a young gentleman of generosity knows how to make allowancefor that circumstance.  Mr. Darnay, good night, God bless you, sir!I hope you have been this day preserved for a prosperous and happylife.--Chair there!"Perhaps a little angry with himself, as well as with the barrister,Mr. Lorry bustled into the chair, and was carried off to Tellson's.Carton, who smelt of port wine, and did not appear to be quite sober,laughed then, and turned to Darnay:"This is a strange chance that throws you and me together.  This mustbe a strange night to you, standing alone here with your counterparton these street stones?""I hardly seem yet," returned Charles Darnay, "to belong to this worldagain.""I don't wonder at it; it's not so long since you were pretty faradvanced on your way to another.  You speak faintly.""I begin to think I _am_ faint.""Then why the devil don't you dine?  I dined, myself, while thosenumskulls were deliberating which world you should belong to--this,or some other.  Let me show you the nearest tavern to dine well at."Drawing his arm through his own, he took him down Ludgate-hill toFleet-street, and so, up a covered way, into a tavern.  Here, theywere shown into a little room, where Charles Darnay was soon recruitinghis strength with a good plain dinner and good wine:  while Carton satopposite to him at the same table, with his separate bottle of portbefore him, and his fully half-insolent manner upon him."Do you feel, yet, that you belong to this terrestrial scheme again,Mr. Darnay?""I am frightfully confused regarding time and place; but I am so farmended as to feel that.""It must be an immense satisfaction!"He said it bitterly, and filled up his glass again:  which was a large one."As to me, the greatest desire I have, is to forget that I belong toit.  It has no good in it for me--except wine like this--nor I for it.So we are not much alike in that particular.  Indeed, I begin to thinkwe are not much alike in any particular, you and I."Confused by the emotion of the day, and feeling his being there withthis Double of coarse deportment, to be like a dream, Charles Darnaywas at a loss how to answer; finally, answered not at all."Now your dinner is done," Carton presently said, "why don't you calla health, Mr. Darnay; why don't you give your toast?""What health?  What toast?""Why, it's on the tip of your tongue.  It ought to be, it must be,I'll swear it's there.""Miss Manette, then!""Miss Manette, then!"Looking his companion full in the face while he drank the toast,Carton flung his glass over his shoulder against the wall, where itshivered to pieces; then, rang the bell, and ordered in another."That's a fair young lady to hand to a coach in the dark, Mr. Darnay!"he said, ruing his new goblet.A slight frown and a laconic "Yes," were the answer."That's a fair young lady to be pitied by and wept for by!  How does itfeel?  Is it worth being tried for one's life, to be the object of suchsympathy and compassion, Mr. Darnay?"Again Darnay answered not a word."She was mightily pleased to have your message, when I gave it her.Not that she showed she was pleased, but I suppose she was."The allusion served as a timely reminder to Darnay that thisdisagreeable companion had, of his own free will, assisted him in thestrait of the day.  He turned the dialogue to that point, and thankedhim for it."I neither want any thanks, nor merit any," was the careless rejoinder."It was nothing to do, in the first place; and I don't know why I did it,in the second.  Mr. Darnay, let me ask you a question.""Willingly, and a small return for your good offices.""Do you think I particularly like you?""Really, Mr. Carton," returned the other, oddly disconcerted, "I havenot asked myself the question.""But ask yourself the question now.""You have acted as if you do; but I don't think you do.""_I_ don't think I do," said Carton.  "I begin to have a very goodopinion of your understanding.""Nevertheless," pursued Darnay, rising to ring the bell, "there isnothing in that, I hope, to prevent my calling the reckoning, and ourparting without ill-blood on either side."Carton rejoining, "Nothing in life!" Darnay rang.  "Do you call thewhole reckoning?" said Carton.  On his answering in the affirmative,"Then bring me another pint of this same wine, drawer, and come andwake me at ten."The bill being paid, Charles Darnay rose and wished him good night.Without returning the wish, Carton rose too, with something of athreat of defiance in his manner, and said, "A last word, Mr. Darnay:you think I am drunk?""I think you have been drinking, Mr. Carton.""Think?  You know I have been drinking.""Since I must say so, I know it.""Then you shall likewise know why.  I am a disappointed drudge, sir.I care for no man on earth, and no man on earth cares for me.""Much to be regretted.  You might have used your talents better.""May be so, Mr. Darnay; may be not.  Don't let your sober face elate you,however; you don't know what it may come to.  Good night!"When he was left alone, this strange being took up a candle, went to aglass that hung against the wall, and surveyed himself minutely in it."Do you particularly like the man?" he muttered, at his own image;"why should you particularly like a man who resembles you?  There isnothing in you to like; you know that.  Ah, confound you!  What achange you have made in yourself!  A good reason for taking to a man,that he shows you what you have fallen away from, and what you mighthave been!  Change places with him, and would you have been looked atby those blue eyes as he was, and commiserated by that agitated faceas he was?  Come on, and have it out in plain words!  You hate the fellow."He resorted to his pint of wine for consolation, drank it all in afew minutes, and fell asleep on his arms, with his hair stragglingover the table, and a long winding-sheet in the candle dripping downupon him.VThe JackalThose were drinking days, and most men drank hard.  So very great isthe improvement Time has brought about in such habits, that a moderatestatement of the quantity of wine and punch which one man would swallowin the course of a night, without any detriment to his reputation as aperfect gentleman, would seem, in these days, a ridiculous exaggeration.The learned profession of the law was certainly not behind any otherlearned profession in its Bacchanalian propensities; neither wasMr. Stryver, already fast shouldering his way to a large and lucrativepractice, behind his compeers in this particular, any more than in thedrier parts of the legal race.A favourite at the Old Bailey, and eke at the Sessions, Mr. Stryverhad begun cautiously to hew away the lower staves of the ladder onwhich he mounted.  Sessions and Old Bailey had now to summon theirfavourite, specially, to their longing arms; and shouldering itselftowards the visage of the Lord Chief Justice in the Court of King'sBench, the florid countenance of Mr. Stryver might be daily seen,bursting out of the bed of wigs, like a great sunflower pushing itsway at the sun from among a rank garden-full of flaring companions.It had once been noted at the Bar, that while Mr. Stryver was a glibman, and an unscrupulous, and a ready, and a bold, he had not thatfaculty of extracting the essence from a heap of statements, which isamong the most striking and necessary of the advocate's accomplishments.But, a remarkable improvement came upon him as to this.  The morebusiness he got, the greater his power seemed to grow of getting atits pith and marrow; and however late at night he sat carousing withSydney Carton, he always had his points at his fingers' ends in themorning.Sydney Carton, idlest and most unpromising of men, was Stryver's greatally.  What the two drank together, between Hilary Term and Michaelmas,might have floated a king's ship.  Stryver never had a case in hand,anywhere, but Carton was there, with his hands in his pockets, staringat the ceiling of the court; they went the same Circuit, and even therethey prolonged their usual orgies late into the night, and Carton wasrumoured to be seen at broad day, going home stealthily and unsteadilyto his lodgings, like a dissipated cat.  At last, it began to get about,among such as were interested in the matter, that although Sydney Cartonwould never be a lion, he was an amazingly good jackal, and that herendered suit and service to Stryver in that humble capacity."Ten o'clock, sir," said the man at the tavern, whom he had charged towake him--"ten o'clock, sir.""_What's_ the matter?""Ten o'clock, sir.""What do you mean?  Ten o'clock at night?""Yes, sir.  Your honour told me to call you.""Oh!  I remember.  Very well, very well."After a few dull efforts to get to sleep again, which the man dexterouslycombated by stirring the fire continuously for five minutes, he got up,tossed his hat on, and walked out.  He turned into the Temple, and,having revived himself by twice pacing the pavements of King's Bench-walkand Paper-buildings, turned into the Stryver chambers.The Stryver clerk, who never assisted at these conferences, had gone home,and the Stryver principal opened the door.  He had his slippers on,and a loose bed-gown, and his throat was bare for his greater ease.He had that rather wild, strained, seared marking about the eyes,which may be observed in all free livers of his class, from the portraitof Jeffries downward, and which can be traced, under various disguisesof Art, through the portraits of every Drinking Age."You are a little late, Memory," said Stryver."About the usual time; it may be a quarter of an hour later."They went into a dingy room lined with books and littered with papers,where there was a blazing fire.  A kettle steamed upon the hob, and inthe midst of the wreck of papers a table shone, with plenty of wineupon it, and brandy, and rum, and sugar, and lemons."You have had your bottle, I perceive, Sydney.""Two to-night, I think.  I have been dining with the day's client;or seeing him dine--it's all one!""That was a rare point, Sydney, that you brought to bear upon theidentification.  How did you come by it?  When did it strike you?""I thought he was rather a handsome fellow, and I thought I shouldhave been much the same sort of fellow, if I had had any luck."Mr. Stryver laughed till he shook his precocious paunch."You and your luck, Sydney!  Get to work, get to work."Sullenly enough, the jackal loosened his dress, went into an adjoiningroom, and came back with a large jug of cold water, a basin, and a towelor two.  Steeping the towels in the water, and partially wringing themout, he folded them on his head in a manner hideous to behold, sat downat the table, and said, "Now I am ready!""Not much boiling down to be done to-night, Memory," said Mr. Stryver,gaily, as he looked among his papers."How much?""Only two sets of them.""Give me the worst first.""There they are, Sydney.  Fire away!"The lion then composed himself on his back on a sofa on one side ofthe drinking-table, while the jackal sat at his own paper-bestrewntable proper, on the other side of it, with the bottles and glassesready to his hand.  Both resorted to the drinking-table withoutstint, but each in a different way; the lion for the most partreclining with his hands in his waistband, looking at the fire, oroccasionally flirting with some lighter document; the jackal, withknitted brows and intent face, so deep in his task, that his eyes didnot even follow the hand he stretched out for his glass--which oftengroped about, for a minute or more, before it found the glass for hislips.  Two or three times, the matter in hand became so knotty, thatthe jackal found it imperative on him to get up, and steep his towelsanew.  From these pilgrimages to the jug and basin, he returned withsuch eccentricities of damp headgear as no words can describe; whichwere made the more ludicrous by his anxious gravity.At length the jackal had got together a compact repast for the lion,and proceeded to offer it to him.  The lion took it with care andcaution, made his selections from it, and his remarks upon it,and the jackal assisted both.  When the repast was fully discussed,the lion put his hands in his waistband again, and lay down to mediate.The jackal then invigorated himself with a bum for his throttle,and a fresh application to his head, and applied himself to thecollection of a second meal; this was administered to the lion in thesame manner, and was not disposed of until the clocks struck three inthe morning."And now we have done, Sydney, fill a bumper of punch," said Mr. Stryver.The jackal removed the towels from his head, which had been steamingagain, shook himself, yawned, shivered, and complied."You were very sound, Sydney, in the matter of those crown witnessesto-day.  Every question told.""I always am sound; am I not?""I don't gainsay it.  What has roughened your temper?Put some punch to it and smooth it again."With a deprecatory grunt, the jackal again complied."The old Sydney Carton of old Shrewsbury School," said Stryver,nodding his head over him as he reviewed him in the present and thepast, "the old seesaw Sydney.  Up one minute and down the next; nowin spirits and now in despondency!""Ah!" returned the other, sighing:  "yes!  The same Sydney, with thesame luck.  Even then, I did exercises for other boys, and seldom didmy own.""And why not?""God knows.  It was my way, I suppose."He sat, with his hands in his pockets and his legs stretched outbefore him, looking at the fire."Carton," said his friend, squaring himself at him with a bullyingair, as if the fire-grate had been the furnace in which sustainedendeavour was forged, and the one delicate thing to be done for theold Sydney Carton of old Shrewsbury School was to shoulder him into it,"your way is, and always was, a lame way.  You summon no energy andpurpose.  Look at me.""Oh, botheration!" returned Sydney, with a lighter and more good-humoured laugh, "don't _you_ be moral!""How have I done what I have done?" said Stryver; "how do I do what I do?""Partly through paying me to help you, I suppose.  But it's not worthyour while to apostrophise me, or the air, about it; what you want todo, you do.  You were always in the front rank, and I was always behind.""I had to get into the front rank; I was not born there, was I?""I was not present at the ceremony; but my opinion is you were," saidCarton.  At this, he laughed again, and they both laughed."Before Shrewsbury, and at Shrewsbury, and ever since Shrewsbury,"pursued Carton, "you have fallen into your rank, and I have falleninto mine.  Even when we were fellow-students in the Student-Quarterof Paris, picking up French, and French law, and other French crumbsthat we didn't get much good of, you were always somewhere, and I wasalways nowhere.""And whose fault was that?""Upon my soul, I am not sure that it was not yours.  You were alwaysdriving and riving and shouldering and passing, to that restlessdegree that I had no chance for my life but in rust and repose.  It'sa gloomy thing, however, to talk about one's own past, with the daybreaking.  Turn me in some other direction before I go.""Well then!  Pledge me to the pretty witness," said Stryver, holdingup his glass.  "Are you turned in a pleasant direction?"Apparently not, for he became gloomy again."Pretty witness," he muttered, looking down into his glass.  "I havehad enough of witnesses to-day and to-night; who's your prettywitness?""The picturesque doctor's daughter, Miss Manette.""_She_ pretty?""Is she not?""No.""Why, man alive, she was the admiration of the whole Court!""Rot the admiration of the whole Court!  Who made the Old Bailey ajudge of beauty?  She was a golden-haired doll!""Do you know, Sydney," said Mr. Stryver, looking at him with sharpeyes, and slowly drawing a hand across his florid face:  "do you know,I rather thought, at the time, that you sympathised with thegolden-haired doll, and were quick to see what happened to thegolden-haired doll?""Quick to see what happened!  If a girl, doll or no doll, swoonswithin a yard or two of a man's nose, he can see it without aperspective-glass.  I pledge you, but I deny the beauty.And now I'll have no more drink; I'll get to bed."When his host followed him out on the staircase with a candle,to light him down the stairs, the day was coldly looking in throughits grimy windows.  When he got out of the house, the air was coldand sad, the dull sky overcast, the river dark and dim, the wholescene like a lifeless desert.  And wreaths of dust were spinninground and round before the morning blast, as if the desert-sand hadrisen far away, and the first spray of it in its advance had begun tooverwhelm the city.Waste forces within him, and a desert all around, this man stoodstill on his way across a silent terrace, and saw for a moment,lying in the wilderness before him, a mirage of honourable ambition,self-denial, and perseverance.  In the fair city of this vision,there were airy galleries from which the loves and graces looked uponhim, gardens in which the fruits of life hung ripening, waters of Hopethat sparkled in his sight.  A moment, and it was gone.  Climbing toa high chamber in a well of houses, he threw himself down in hisclothes on a neglected bed, and its pillow was wet with wasted tears.Sadly, sadly, the sun rose; it rose upon no sadder sight than the manof good abilities and good emotions, incapable of their directedexercise, incapable of his own help and his own happiness, sensibleof the blight on him, and resigning himself to let it eat him away.VIHundreds of PeopleThe quiet lodgings of Doctor Manette were in a quiet street-cornernot far from Soho-square.  On the afternoon of a certain fine Sundaywhen the waves of four months had roiled over the trial for treason,and carried it, as to the public interest and memory, far out to sea,Mr. Jarvis Lorry walked along the sunny streets from Clerkenwellwhere he lived, on his way to dine with the Doctor.  After severalrelapses into business-absorption, Mr. Lorry had become the Doctor'sfriend, and the quiet street-corner was the sunny part of his life.On this certain fine Sunday, Mr. Lorry walked towards Soho, early inthe afternoon, for three reasons of habit.  Firstly, because, on fineSundays, he often walked out, before dinner, with the Doctor and Lucie;secondly, because, on unfavourable Sundays, he was accustomed to bewith them as the family friend, talking, reading, looking out of window,and generally getting through the day; thirdly, because he happenedto have his own little shrewd doubts to solve, and knew how the waysof the Doctor's household pointed to that time as a likely time forsolving them.A quainter corner than the corner where the Doctor lived, was not tobe found in London.  There was no way through it, and the front windowsof the Doctor's lodgings commanded a pleasant little vista of streetthat had a congenial air of retirement on it.  There were few buildingsthen, north of the Oxford-road, and forest-trees flourished, and wildflowers grew, and the hawthorn blossomed, in the now vanished fields.As a consequence, country airs circulated in Soho with vigorous freedom,instead of languishing into the parish like stray paupers without asettlement; and there was many a good south wall, not far off, on whichthe peaches ripened in their season.The summer light struck into the corner brilliantly in the earlierpart of the day; but, when the streets grew hot, the corner was inshadow, though not in shadow so remote but that you could see beyondit into a glare of brightness.  It was a cool spot, staid but cheerful,a wonderful place for echoes, and a very harbour from the raging streets.There ought to have been a tranquil bark in such an anchorage, andthere was.  The Doctor occupied two floors of a large stiff house,where several callings purported to be pursued by day, but whereoflittle was audible any day, and which was shunned by all of them atnight.  In a building at the back, attainable by a courtyard where aplane-tree rustled its green leaves, church-organs claimed to bemade, and silver to be chased, and likewise gold to be beaten by somemysterious giant who had a golden arm starting out of the wall of thefront hall--as if he had beaten himself precious, and menaced a similarconversion of all visitors.  Very little of these trades, or of alonely lodger rumoured to live up-stairs, or of a dim coach-trimmingmaker asserted to have a counting-house below, was ever heard or seen.Occasionally, a stray workman putting his coat on, traversed thehall, or a stranger peered about there, or a distant clink was heardacross the courtyard, or a thump from the golden giant.  These,however, were only the exceptions required to prove the rule that thesparrows in the plane-tree behind the house, and the echoes in thecorner before it, had their own way from Sunday morning unto Saturdaynight.Doctor Manette received such patients here as his old reputation,and its revival in the floating whispers of his story, brought him.His scientific knowledge, and his vigilance and skill in conductingingenious experiments, brought him otherwise into moderate request,and he earned as much as he wanted.These things were within Mr. Jarvis Lorry's knowledge, thoughts, andnotice, when he rang the door-bell of the tranquil house in the corner,on the fine Sunday afternoon."Doctor Manette at home?"Expected home."Miss Lucie at home?"Expected home."Miss Pross at home?"Possibly at home, but of a certainty impossible for handmaid to anticipateintentions of Miss Pross, as to admission or denial of the fact."As I am at home myself," said Mr. Lorry, "I'll go upstairs."Although the Doctor's daughter had known nothing of the country ofher birth, she appeared to have innately derived from it that abilityto make much of little means, which is one of its most useful andmost agreeable characteristics.  Simple as the furniture was, it wasset off by so many little adornments, of no value but for their tasteand fancy, that its effect was delightful.  The disposition ofeverything in the rooms, from the largest object to the least; thearrangement of colours, the elegant variety and contrast obtained bythrift in trifles, by delicate hands, clear eyes, and good sense;were at once so pleasant in themselves, and so expressive of theiroriginator, that, as Mr. Lorry stood looking about him, the verychairs and tables seemed to ask him, with something of that peculiarexpression which he knew so well by this time, whether he approved?There were three rooms on a floor, and, the doors by which theycommunicated being put open that the air might pass freely throughthem all, Mr. Lorry, smilingly observant of that fanciful resemblancewhich he detected all around him, walked from one to another.The first was the best room, and in it were Lucie's birds, and flowers,and books, and desk, and work-table, and box of water-colours;the second was the Doctor's consulting-room, used also as thedining-room; the third, changingly speckled by the rustle of theplane-tree in the yard, was the Doctor's bedroom, and there, in acorner, stood the disused shoemaker's bench and tray of tools,much as it had stood on the fifth floor of the dismal house by thewine-shop, in the suburb of Saint Antoine in Paris."I wonder," said Mr. Lorry, pausing in his looking about, "that hekeeps that reminder of his sufferings about him!""And why wonder at that?" was the abrupt inquiry that made him start.It proceeded from Miss Pross, the wild red woman, strong of hand,whose acquaintance he had first made at the Royal George Hotel at Dover,and had since improved."I should have thought--" Mr. Lorry began."Pooh!  You'd have thought!" said Miss Pross; and Mr. Lorry left off."How do you do?" inquired that lady then--sharply, and yet as if toexpress that she bore him no malice."I am pretty well, I thank you," answered Mr. Lorry, with meekness;"how are you?""Nothing to boast of," said Miss Pross."Indeed?""Ah! indeed!" said Miss Pross.  "I am very much put out about my Ladybird.""Indeed?""For gracious sake say something else besides `indeed,' or you'llfidget me to death," said Miss Pross:  whose character (dissociatedfrom stature) was shortness."Really, then?" said Mr. Lorry, as an amendment."Really, is bad enough," returned Miss Pross, "but better.  Yes, I amvery much put out.""May I ask the cause?""I don't want dozens of people who are not at all worthy of Ladybird,to come here looking after her," said Miss Pross."_Do_ dozens come for that purpose?""Hundreds," said Miss Pross.It was characteristic of this lady (as of some other people before hertime and since) that whenever her original proposition was questioned,she exaggerated it."Dear me!" said Mr. Lorry, as the safest remark he could think of."I have lived with the darling--or the darling has lived with me,and paid me for it; which she certainly should never have done,you may take your affidavit, if I could have afforded to keep eithermyself or her for nothing--since she was ten years old.  And it'sreally very hard," said Miss Pross.Not seeing with precision what was very hard, Mr. Lorry shook his head;using that important part of himself as a sort of fairy cloak thatwould fit anything."All sorts of people who are not in the least degree worthy of the pet,are always turning up," said Miss Pross.  "When you began it--""_I_ began it, Miss Pross?""Didn't you?  Who brought her father to life?""Oh!  If _that_ was beginning it--" said Mr. Lorry."It wasn't ending it, I suppose?  I say, when you began it, it was hardenough; not that I have any fault to find with Doctor Manette, exceptthat he is not worthy of such a daughter, which is no imputation onhim, for it was not to be expected that anybody should be, under anycircumstances.  But it really is doubly and trebly hard to have crowdsand multitudes of people turning up after him (I could have forgiven him),to take Ladybird's affections away from me."Mr. Lorry knew Miss Pross to be very jealous, but he also knew her bythis time to be, beneath the service of her eccentricity, one of thoseunselfish creatures--found only among women--who will, for pure loveand admiration, bind themselves willing slaves, to youth when theyhave lost it, to beauty that they never had, to accomplishments thatthey were never fortunate enough to gain, to bright hopes that nevershone upon their own sombre lives.  He knew enough of the world toknow that there is nothing in it better than the faithful service ofthe heart; so rendered and so free from any mercenary taint, he hadsuch an exalted respect for it, that in the retributive arrangementsmade by his own mind--we all make such arrangements, more or less--he stationed Miss Pross much nearer to the lower Angels than manyladies immeasurably better got up both by Nature and Art, who hadbalances at Tellson's."There never was, nor will be, but one man worthy of Ladybird," saidMiss Pross; "and that was my brother Solomon, if he hadn't made amistake in life."Here again:  Mr. Lorry's inquiries into Miss Pross's personal historyhad established the fact that her brother Solomon was a heartlessscoundrel who had stripped her of everything she possessed, as astake to speculate with, and had abandoned her in her poverty forevermore, with no touch of compunction.  Miss Pross's fidelity ofbelief in Solomon (deducting a mere trifle for this slight mistake)was quite a serious matter with Mr. Lorry, and had its weight in hisgood opinion of her."As we happen to be alone for the moment, and are both people ofbusiness," he said, when they had got back to the drawing-room andhad sat down there in friendly relations, "let me ask you--does theDoctor, in talking with Lucie, never refer to the shoemaking time, yet?""Never.""And yet keeps that bench and those tools beside him?""Ah!" returned Miss Pross, shaking her head.  "But I don't say hedon't refer to it within himself.""Do you believe that he thinks of it much?""I do," said Miss Pross."Do you imagine--" Mr. Lorry had begun, when Miss Pross took him upshort with:"Never imagine anything.  Have no imagination at all.""I stand corrected; do you suppose--you go so far as to suppose,sometimes?""Now and then," said Miss Pross."Do you suppose," Mr. Lorry went on, with a laughing twinkle in hisbright eye, as it looked kindly at her, "that Doctor Manette has anytheory of his own, preserved through all those years, relative to thecause of his being so oppressed; perhaps, even to the name of hisoppressor?""I don't suppose anything about it but what Ladybird tells me.""And that is--?""That she thinks he has.""Now don't be angry at my asking all these questions; because I am amere dull man of business, and you are a woman of business.""Dull?" Miss Pross inquired, with placidity.Rather wishing his modest adjective away, Mr. Lorry replied, "No, no,no.  Surely not.  To return to business:--Is it not remarkable thatDoctor Manette, unquestionably innocent of any crime as we are allwell assured he is, should never touch upon that question?  I will notsay with me, though he had business relations with me many years ago,and we are now intimate; I will say with the fair daughter to whom heis so devotedly attached, and who is so devotedly attached to him?Believe me, Miss Pross, I don't approach the topic with you, out ofcuriosity, but out of zealous interest.""Well!  To the best of my understanding, and bad's the best,you'll tell me," said Miss Pross, softened by the tone of the apology,"he is afraid of the whole subject.""Afraid?""It's plain enough, I should think, why he may be.  It's a dreadfulremembrance.  Besides that, his loss of himself grew out of it.Not knowing how he lost himself, or how he recovered himself, he maynever feel certain of not losing himself again.  That alone wouldn'tmake the subject pleasant, I should think."It was a profounder remark than Mr. Lorry had looked for.  "True,"said he, "and fearful to reflect upon.  Yet, a doubt lurks in my mind,Miss Pross, whether it is good for Doctor Manette to have thatsuppression always shut up within him.  Indeed, it is this doubt andthe uneasiness it sometimes causes me that has led me to our presentconfidence.""Can't be helped," said Miss Pross, shaking her head.  "Touch thatstring, and he instantly changes for the worse.  Better leave italone.  In short, must leave it alone, like or no like.  Sometimes,he gets up in the dead of the night, and will be heard, by usoverhead there, walking up and down, walking up and down, in his room.Ladybird has learnt to know then that his mind is walking up anddown, walking up and down, in his old prison.  She hurries to him,and they go on together, walking up and down, walking up and down,until he is composed.  But he never says a word of the true reason ofhis restlessness, to her, and she finds it best not to hint at it to him.In silence they go walking up and down together, walking up and downtogether, till her love and company have brought him to himself."Notwithstanding Miss Pross's denial of her own imagination, there wasa perception of the pain of being monotonously haunted by one sad idea,in her repetition of the phrase, walking up and down, which testifiedto her possessing such a thing.The corner has been mentioned as a wonderful corner for echoes;it had begun to echo so resoundingly to the tread of coming feet,that it seemed as though the very mention of that weary pacing to andfro had set it going."Here they are!" said Miss Pross, rising to break up the conference;"and now we shall have hundreds of people pretty soon!"It was such a curious corner in its acoustical properties, such apeculiar Ear of a place, that as Mr. Lorry stood at the open window,looking for the father and daughter whose steps he heard, he fanciedthey would never approach.  Not only would the echoes die away,as though the steps had gone; but, echoes of other steps that nevercame would be heard in their stead, and would die away for good whenthey seemed close at hand.  However, father and daughter did at lastappear, and Miss Pross was ready at the street door to receive them.Miss Pross was a pleasant sight, albeit wild, and red, and grim, takingoff her darling's bonnet when she came up-stairs, and touching it upwith the ends of her handkerchief, and blowing the dust off it, andfolding her mantle ready for laying by, and smoothing her rich hairwith as much pride as she could possibly have taken in her own hairif she had been the vainest and handsomest of women.  Her darling wasa pleasant sight too, embracing her and thanking her, and protestingagainst her taking so much trouble for her--which last she only daredto do playfully, or Miss Pross, sorely hurt, would have retired toher own chamber and cried.  The Doctor was a pleasant sight too,looking on at them, and telling Miss Pross how she spoilt Lucie, inaccents and with eyes that had as much spoiling in them as Miss Prosshad, and would have had more if it were possible.  Mr. Lorry was apleasant sight too, beaming at all this in his little wig, and thankinghis bachelor stars for having lighted him in his declining years to aHome.  But, no Hundreds of people came to see the sights, and Mr. Lorrylooked in vain for the fulfilment of Miss Pross's prediction.Dinner-time, and still no Hundreds of people.  In the arrangements ofthe little household, Miss Pross took charge of the lower regions,and always acquitted herself marvellously.  Her dinners, of a verymodest quality, were so well cooked and so well served, and so neatin their contrivances, half English and half French, that nothingcould be better.  Miss Pross's friendship being of the thoroughlypractical kind, she had ravaged Soho and the adjacent provinces, insearch of impoverished French, who, tempted by shillings and half-crowns, would impart culinary mysteries to her.  From these decayedsons and daughters of Gaul, she had acquired such wonderful arts,that the woman and girl who formed the staff of domestics regardedher as quite a Sorceress, or Cinderella's Godmother:  who would sendout for a fowl, a rabbit, a vegetable or two from the garden, andchange them into anything she pleased.On Sundays, Miss Pross dined at the Doctor's table, but on other dayspersisted in taking her meals at unknown periods, either in the lowerregions, or in her own room on the second floor--a blue chamber,to which no one but her Ladybird ever gained admittance.  On thisoccasion, Miss Pross, responding to Ladybird's pleasant face andpleasant efforts to please her, unbent exceedingly; so the dinner wasvery pleasant, too.It was an oppressive day, and, after dinner, Lucie proposed that thewine should be carried out under the plane-tree, and they should sitthere in the air.  As everything turned upon her, and revolved abouther, they went out under the plane-tree, and she carried the winedown for the special benefit of Mr. Lorry.  She had installed herself,some time before, as Mr. Lorry's cup-bearer; and while they sat underthe plane-tree, talking, she kept his glass replenished.  Mysteriousbacks and ends of houses peeped at them as they talked, and theplane-tree whispered to them in its own way above their heads.Still, the Hundreds of people did not present themselves.  Mr. Darnaypresented himself while they were sitting under the plane-tree,but he was only One.Doctor Manette received him kindly, and so did Lucie.  But, MissPross suddenly became afflicted with a twitching in the head andbody, and retired into the house.  She was not unfrequently thevictim of this disorder, and she called it, in familiar conversation,"a fit of the jerks."The Doctor was in his best condition, and looked specially young.The resemblance between him and Lucie was very strong at such times,and as they sat side by side, she leaning on his shoulder, and heresting his arm on the back of her chair, it was very agreeable totrace the likeness.He had been talking all day, on many subjects, and with unusual vivacity."Pray, Doctor Manette," said Mr. Darnay, as they sat under theplane-tree--and he said it in the natural pursuit of the topic inhand, which happened to be the old buildings of London--"have youseen much of the Tower?""Lucie and I have been there; but only casually.  We have seen enoughof it, to know that it teems with interest; little more.""_I_ have been there, as you remember," said Darnay, with a smile,though reddening a little angrily, "in another character, and not ina character that gives facilities for seeing much of it.  They toldme a curious thing when I was there.""What was that?" Lucie asked."In making some alterations, the workmen came upon an old dungeon,which had been, for many years, built up and forgotten.  Every stoneof its inner wall was covered by inscriptions which had been carvedby prisoners--dates, names, complaints, and prayers.  Upon a cornerstone in an angle of the wall, one prisoner, who seemed to have goneto execution, had cut as his last work, three letters.  They weredone with some very poor instrument, and hurriedly, with an unsteadyhand.  At first, they were read as D.  I.  C.; but, on being morecarefully examined, the last letter was found to be G.  There was norecord or legend of any prisoner with those initials, and manyfruitless guesses were made what the name could have been.At length, it was suggested that the letters were not initials, butthe complete word, DIG.  The floor was examined very carefully underthe inscription, and, in the earth beneath a stone, or tile, or somefragment of paving, were found the ashes of a paper, mingled with theashes of a small leathern case or bag.  What the unknown prisoner hadwritten will never be read, but he had written something, and hiddenit away to keep it from the gaoler.""My father," exclaimed Lucie, "you are ill!"He had suddenly started up, with his hand to his head.  His mannerand his look quite terrified them all."No, my dear, not ill.  There are large drops of rain falling,and they made me start.  We had better go in."He recovered himself almost instantly.  Rain was really falling inlarge drops, and he showed the back of his hand with rain-drops on it.But, he said not a single word in reference to the discovery that hadbeen told of, and, as they went into the house, the business eye ofMr. Lorry either detected, or fancied it detected, on his face, as itturned towards Charles Darnay, the same singular look that had beenupon it when it turned towards him in the passages of the Court House.He recovered himself so quickly, however, that Mr. Lorry had doubtsof his business eye.  The arm of the golden giant in the hall was notmore steady than he was, when he stopped under it to remark to themthat he was not yet proof against slight surprises (if he ever wouldbe), and that the rain had startled him.Tea-time, and Miss Pross making tea, with another fit of the jerksupon her, and yet no Hundreds of people.  Mr. Carton had lounged in,but he made only Two.The night was so very sultry, that although they sat with doors andwindows open, they were overpowered by heat.  When the tea-table wasdone with, they all moved to one of the windows, and looked out intothe heavy twilight.  Lucie sat by her father; Darnay sat beside her;Carton leaned against a window.  The curtains were long and white,and some of the thunder-gusts that whirled into the corner, caughtthem up to the ceiling, and waved them like spectral wings."The rain-drops are still falling, large, heavy, and few," saidDoctor Manette.  "It comes slowly.""It comes surely," said Carton.They spoke low, as people watching and waiting mostly do; as peoplein a dark room, watching and waiting for Lightning, always do.There was a great hurry in the streets of people speeding away to getshelter before the storm broke; the wonderful corner for echoesresounded with the echoes of footsteps coming and going, yet not afootstep was there."A multitude of people, and yet a solitude!" said Darnay, when theyhad listened for a while."Is it not impressive, Mr. Darnay?" asked Lucie.  "Sometimes, I havesat here of an evening, until I have fancied--but even the shade of afoolish fancy makes me shudder to-night, when all is so black andsolemn--""Let us shudder too.  We may know what it is.""It will seem nothing to you.  Such whims are only impressive as weoriginate them, I think; they are not to be communicated.  I havesometimes sat alone here of an evening, listening, until I have madethe echoes out to be the echoes of all the footsteps that are comingby-and-bye into our lives.""There is a great crowd coming one day into our lives, if that be so,"Sydney Carton struck in, in his moody way.The footsteps were incessant, and the hurry of them became more andmore rapid.  The corner echoed and re-echoed with the tread of feet;some, as it seemed, under the windows; some, as it seemed, in the room;some coming, some going, some breaking off, some stopping altogether;all in the distant streets, and not one within sight."Are all these footsteps destined to come to all of us, Miss Manette,or are we to divide them among us?""I don't know, Mr. Darnay; I told you it was a foolish fancy, but youasked for it.  When I have yielded myself to it, I have been alone,and then I have imagined them the footsteps of the people who are tocome into my life, and my father's.""I take them into mine!" said Carton.  "_I_ ask no questions and makeno stipulations.  There is a great crowd bearing down upon us, MissManette, and I see them--by the Lightning."  He added the last words,after there had been a vivid flash which had shown him lounging inthe window."And I hear them!" he added again, after a peal of thunder."Here they come, fast, fierce, and furious!"It was the rush and roar of rain that he typified, and it stopped him,for no voice could be heard in it.  A memorable storm of thunder andlightning broke with that sweep of water, and there was not a moment'sinterval in crash, and fire, and rain, until after the moon rose atmidnight.The great bell of Saint Paul's was striking one in the cleared air,when Mr. Lorry, escorted by Jerry, high-booted and bearing a lantern,set forth on his return-passage to Clerkenwell.  There were solitarypatches of road on the way between Soho and Clerkenwell, and Mr. Lorry,mindful of foot-pads, always retained Jerry for this service:  thoughit was usually performed a good two hours earlier."What a night it has been!  Almost a night, Jerry," said Mr. Lorry,"to bring the dead out of their graves.""I never see the night myself, master--nor yet I don't expectto--what would do that," answered Jerry."Good night, Mr. Carton," said the man of business.  "Good night,Mr. Darnay.  Shall we ever see such a night again, together!"Perhaps.  Perhaps, see the great crowd of people with its rush androar, bearing down upon them, too.VIIMonseigneur in TownMonseigneur, one of the great lords in power at the Court, held hisfortnightly reception in his grand hotel in Paris.  Monseigneur wasin his inner room, his sanctuary of sanctuaries, the Holiest ofHoliests to the crowd of worshippers in the suite of rooms without.Monseigneur was about to take his chocolate.  Monseigneur couldswallow a great many things with ease, and was by some few sullenminds supposed to be rather rapidly swallowing France; but, hismorning's chocolate could not so much as get into the throat ofMonseigneur, without the aid of four strong men besides the Cook.Yes.  It took four men, all four ablaze with gorgeous decoration,and the Chief of them unable to exist with fewer than two goldwatches in his pocket, emulative of the noble and chaste fashion setby Monseigneur, to conduct the happy chocolate to Monseigneur's lips.One lacquey carried the chocolate-pot into the sacred presence;a second, milled and frothed the chocolate with the little instrumenthe bore for that function; a third, presented the favoured napkin;a fourth (he of the two gold watches), poured the chocolate out.It was impossible for Monseigneur to dispense with one of theseattendants on the chocolate and hold his high place under theadmiring Heavens.  Deep would have been the blot upon his escutcheonif his chocolate had been ignobly waited on by only three men; hemust have died of two.Monseigneur had been out at a little supper last night, where theComedy and the Grand Opera were charmingly represented.  Monseigneurwas out at a little supper most nights, with fascinating company.So polite and so impressible was Monseigneur, that the Comedy andthe Grand Opera had far more influence with him in the tiresomearticles of state affairs and state secrets, than the needs of allFrance.  A happy circumstance for France, as the like always is forall countries similarly favoured!--always was for England (by way ofexample), in the regretted days of the merry Stuart who sold it.Monseigneur had one truly noble idea of general public business,which was, to let everything go on in its own way; of particularpublic business, Monseigneur had the other truly noble idea that itmust all go his way--tend to his own power and pocket.  Of hispleasures, general and particular, Monseigneur had the other trulynoble idea, that the world was made for them.  The text of his order(altered from the original by only a pronoun, which is not much) ran:"The earth and the fulness thereof are mine, saith Monseigneur."Yet, Monseigneur had slowly found that vulgar embarrassments creptinto his affairs, both private and public; and he had, as to bothclasses of affairs, allied himself perforce with a Farmer-General.As to finances public, because Monseigneur could not make anythingat all of them, and must consequently let them out to somebody whocould; as to finances private, because Farmer-Generals were rich, andMonseigneur, after generations of great luxury and expense, wasgrowing poor.  Hence Monseigneur had taken his sister from a convent,while there was yet time to ward off the impending veil, the cheapestgarment she could wear, and had bestowed her as a prize upon a veryrich Farmer-General, poor in family.  Which Farmer-General, carryingan appropriate cane with a golden apple on the top of it, was nowamong the company in the outer rooms, much prostrated before bymankind--always excepting superior mankind of the blood of Monseigneur,who, his own wife included, looked down upon him with the loftiestcontempt.A sumptuous man was the Farmer-General.  Thirty horses stood in hisstables, twenty-four male domestics sat in his halls, six body-womenwaited on his wife.  As one who pretended to do nothing but plunderand forage where he could, the Farmer-General--howsoever hismatrimonial relations conduced to social morality--was at least thegreatest reality among the personages who attended at the hotel ofMonseigneur that day.For, the rooms, though a beautiful scene to look at, and adorned withevery device of decoration that the taste and skill of the time couldachieve, were, in truth, not a sound business; considered with anyreference to the scarecrows in the rags and nightcaps elsewhere(and not so far off, either, but that the watching towers of NotreDame, almost equidistant from the two extremes, could see them both),they would have been an exceedingly uncomfortable business--if thatcould have been anybody's business, at the house of Monseigneur.Military officers destitute of military knowledge; naval officerswith no idea of a ship; civil officers without a notion of affairs;brazen ecclesiastics, of the worst world worldly, with sensual eyes,loose tongues, and looser lives; all totally unfit for their severalcallings, all lying horribly in pretending to belong to them, but allnearly or remotely of the order of Monseigneur, and therefore foistedon all public employments from which anything was to be got; these wereto be told off by the score and the score.  People not immediatelyconnected with Monseigneur or the State, yet equally unconnected withanything that was real, or with lives passed in travelling by anystraight road to any true earthly end, were no less abundant.Doctors who made great fortunes out of dainty remedies for imaginarydisorders that never existed, smiled upon their courtly patients inthe ante-chambers of Monseigneur.  Projectors who had discoveredevery kind of remedy for the little evils with which the State wastouched, except the remedy of setting to work in earnest to root outa single sin, poured their distracting babble into any ears theycould lay hold of, at the reception of Monseigneur.  UnbelievingPhilosophers who were remodelling the world with words, and makingcard-towers of Babel to scale the skies with, talked with UnbelievingChemists who had an eye on the transmutation of metals, at thiswonderful gathering accumulated by Monseigneur.  Exquisite gentlemenof the finest breeding, which was at that remarkable time--and hasbeen since--to be known by its fruits of indifference to everynatural subject of human interest, were in the most exemplary stateof exhaustion, at the hotel of Monseigneur.  Such homes had thesevarious notabilities left behind them in the fine world of Paris,that the spies among the assembled devotees of Monseigneur--forming agoodly half of the polite company--would have found it hard todiscover among the angels of that sphere one solitary wife, who, inher manners and appearance, owned to being a Mother.  Indeed, exceptfor the mere act of bringing a troublesome creature into this world--which does not go far towards the realisation of the name of mother--there was no such thing known to the fashion.  Peasant women kept theunfashionable babies close, and brought them up, and charming grandmammasof sixty dressed and supped as at twenty.The leprosy of unreality disfigured every human creature in attendanceupon Monseigneur.  In the outermost room were half a dozen exceptionalpeople who had had, for a few years, some vague misgiving in themthat things in general were going rather wrong.  As a promising wayof setting them right, half of the half-dozen had become members of afantastic sect of Convulsionists, and were even then considering withinthemselves whether they should foam, rage, roar, and turn catalepticon the spot--thereby setting up a highly intelligible finger-post tothe Future, for Monseigneur's guidance.  Besides these Dervishes,were other three who had rushed into another sect, which mendedmatters with a jargon about "the Centre of Truth:" holding that Manhad got out of the Centre of Truth--which did not need muchdemonstration--but had not got out of the Circumference, and that hewas to be kept from flying out of the Circumference, and was even tobe shoved back into the Centre, by fasting and seeing of spirits.Among these, accordingly, much discoursing with spirits went on--andit did a world of good which never became manifest.But, the comfort was, that all the company at the grand hotel ofMonseigneur were perfectly dressed.  If the Day of Judgment had onlybeen ascertained to be a dress day, everybody there would have beeneternally correct.  Such frizzling and powdering and sticking up ofhair, such delicate complexions artificially preserved and mended,such gallant swords to look at, and such delicate honour to the senseof smell, would surely keep anything going, for ever and ever.The exquisite gentlemen of the finest breeding wore little pendenttrinkets that chinked as they languidly moved; these golden fettersrang like precious little bells; and what with that ringing, and withthe rustle of silk and brocade and fine linen, there was a flutter inthe air that fanned Saint Antoine and his devouring hunger far away.Dress was the one unfailing talisman and charm used for keeping allthings in their places.  Everybody was dressed for a Fancy Ball thatwas never to leave off.  From the Palace of the Tuileries, throughMonseigneur and the whole Court, through the Chambers, the Tribunalsof Justice, and all society (except the scarecrows), the Fancy Balldescended to the Common Executioner:  who, in pursuance of the charm,was required to officiate "frizzled, powdered, in a gold-laced coat,pumps, and white silk stockings."  At the gallows and the wheel--theaxe was a rarity--Monsieur Paris, as it was the episcopal mode amonghis brother Professors of the provinces, Monsieur Orleans, and therest, to call him, presided in this dainty dress.  And who among thecompany at Monseigneur's reception in that seventeen hundred andeightieth year of our Lord, could possibly doubt, that a systemrooted in a frizzled hangman, powdered, gold-laced, pumped, andwhite-silk stockinged, would see the very stars out!Monseigneur having eased his four men of their burdens and taken hischocolate, caused the doors of the Holiest of Holiests to be thrownopen, and issued forth.  Then, what submission, what cringing andfawning, what servility, what abject humiliation!  As to bowing downin body and spirit, nothing in that way was left for Heaven--whichmay have been one among other reasons why the worshippers ofMonseigneur never troubled it.Bestowing a word of promise here and a smile there, a whisper on onehappy slave and a wave of the hand on another, Monseigneur affablypassed through his rooms to the remote region of the Circumference ofTruth.  There, Monseigneur turned, and came back again, and so in duecourse of time got himself shut up in his sanctuary by the chocolatesprites, and was seen no more.The show being over, the flutter in the air became quite a littlestorm, and the precious little bells went ringing downstairs.There was soon but one person left of all the crowd, and he, with hishat under his arm and his snuff-box in his hand, slowly passed amongthe mirrors on his way out."I devote you," said this person, stopping at the last door on hisway, and turning in the direction of the sanctuary, "to the Devil!"With that, he shook the snuff from his fingers as if he had shakenthe dust from his feet, and quietly walked downstairs.He was a man of about sixty, handsomely dressed, haughty in manner,and with a face like a fine mask.  A face of a transparent paleness;every feature in it clearly defined; one set expression on it.The nose, beautifully formed otherwise, was very slightly pinched atthe top of each nostril.  In those two compressions, or dints, theonly little change that the face ever showed, resided.  They persistedin changing colour sometimes, and they would be occasionally dilatedand contracted by something like a faint pulsation; then, they gave alook of treachery, and cruelty, to the whole countenance.  Examinedwith attention, its capacity of helping such a look was to be foundin the line of the mouth, and the lines of the orbits of the eyes,being much too horizontal and thin; still, in the effect of the facemade, it was a handsome face, and a remarkable one.Its owner went downstairs into the courtyard, got into his carriage,and drove away.  Not many people had talked with him at the reception;he had stood in a little space apart, and Monseigneur might have beenwarmer in his manner.  It appeared, under the circumstances, ratheragreeable to him to see the common people dispersed before his horses,and often barely escaping from being run down.  His man drove as ifhe were charging an enemy, and the furious recklessness of the manbrought no check into the face, or to the lips, of the master.  Thecomplaint had sometimes made itself audible, even in that deaf cityand dumb age, that, in the narrow streets without footways, the fiercepatrician custom of hard driving endangered and maimed the mere vulgarin a barbarous manner.  But, few cared enough for that to think of ita second time, and, in this matter, as in all others, the commonwretches were left to get out of their difficulties as they could.With a wild rattle and clatter, and an inhuman abandonment ofconsideration not easy to be understood in these days, the carriagedashed through streets and swept round corners, with women screamingbefore it, and men clutching each other and clutching children out ofits way.  At last, swooping at a street corner by a fountain, one ofits wheels came to a sickening little jolt, and there was a loud cryfrom a number of voices, and the horses reared and plunged.But for the latter inconvenience, the carriage probably would nothave stopped; carriages were often known to drive on, and leave theirwounded behind, and why not?  But the frightened valet had got down ina hurry, and there were twenty hands at the horses' bridles."What has gone wrong?" said Monsieur, calmly looking out.A tall man in a nightcap had caught up a bundle from among the feetof the horses, and had laid it on the basement of the fountain,and was down in the mud and wet, howling over it like a wild animal."Pardon, Monsieur the Marquis!" said a ragged and submissive man,"it is a child.""Why does he make that abominable noise?  Is it his child?""Excuse me, Monsieur the Marquis--it is a pity--yes."The fountain was a little removed; for the street opened, where itwas, into a space some ten or twelve yards square.  As the tall mansuddenly got up from the ground, and came running at the carriage,Monsieur the Marquis clapped his hand for an instant on his sword-hilt."Killed!" shrieked the man, in wild desperation, extending both armsat their length above his head, and staring at him.  "Dead!"The people closed round, and looked at Monsieur the Marquis.There was nothing revealed by the many eyes that looked at him butwatchfulness and eagerness; there was no visible menacing or anger.Neither did the people say anything; after the first cry, they hadbeen silent, and they remained so.  The voice of the submissive manwho had spoken, was flat and tame in its extreme submission.Monsieur the Marquis ran his eyes over them all, as if they had beenmere rats come out of their holes.He took out his purse."It is extraordinary to me," said he, "that you people cannot takecare of yourselves and your children.  One or the other of you is forever in the way.  How do I know what injury you have done my horses.See!  Give him that."He threw out a gold coin for the valet to pick up, and all the headscraned forward that all the eyes might look down at it as it fell.The tall man called out again with a most unearthly cry, "Dead!"He was arrested by the quick arrival of another man, for whom therest made way.  On seeing him, the miserable creature fell upon hisshoulder, sobbing and crying, and pointing to the fountain, wheresome women were stooping over the motionless bundle, and movinggently about it.  They were as silent, however, as the men."I know all, I know all," said the last comer.  "Be a brave man, myGaspard!  It is better for the poor little plaything to die so, thanto live.  It has died in a moment without pain.  Could it have livedan hour as happily?""You are a philosopher, you there," said the Marquis, smiling."How do they call you?""They call me Defarge.""Of what trade?""Monsieur the Marquis, vendor of wine.""Pick up that, philosopher and vendor of wine," said the Marquis,throwing him another gold coin, "and spend it as you will.The horses there; are they right?"Without deigning to look at the assemblage a second time, Monsieurthe Marquis leaned back in his seat, and was just being driven awaywith the air of a gentleman who had accidentally broke some commonthing, and had paid for it, and could afford to pay for it; when hisease was suddenly disturbed by a coin flying into his carriage,and ringing on its floor."Hold!" said Monsieur the Marquis.  "Hold the horses!  Who threw that?"He looked to the spot where Defarge the vendor of wine had stood,a moment before; but the wretched father was grovelling on his faceon the pavement in that spot, and the figure that stood beside himwas the figure of a dark stout woman, knitting."You dogs!" said the Marquis, but smoothly, and with an unchanged front,except as to the spots on his nose:  "I would ride over any of youvery willingly, and exterminate you from the earth.  If I knew whichrascal threw at the carriage, and if that brigand were sufficientlynear it, he should be crushed under the wheels."So cowed was their condition, and so long and hard their experienceof what such a man could do to them, within the law and beyond it,that not a voice, or a hand, or even an eye was raised.  Among themen, not one.  But the woman who stood knitting looked up steadily,and looked the Marquis in the face.  It was not for his dignity tonotice it; his contemptuous eyes passed over her, and over all theother rats; and he leaned back in his seat again, and gave the word"Go on!"He was driven on, and other carriages came whirling by in quicksuccession; the Minister, the State-Projector, the Farmer-General,the Doctor, the Lawyer, the Ecclesiastic, the Grand Opera, theComedy, the whole Fancy Ball in a bright continuous flow, camewhirling by.  The rats had crept out of their holes to look on,and they remained looking on for hours; soldiers and police oftenpassing between them and the spectacle, and making a barrier behindwhich they slunk, and through which they peeped.  The father had longago taken up his bundle and bidden himself away with it, when thewomen who had tended the bundle while it lay on the base of thefountain, sat there watching the running of the water and the rollingof the Fancy Ball--when the one woman who had stood conspicuous,knitting, still knitted on with the steadfastness of Fate.  The waterof the fountain ran, the swift river ran, the day ran into evening,so much life in the city ran into death according to rule, time andtide waited for no man, the rats were sleeping close together intheir dark holes again, the Fancy Ball was lighted up at supper,all things ran their course.VIIIMonseigneur in the CountryA beautiful landscape, with the corn bright in it, but not abundant.Patches of poor rye where corn should have been, patches of poor peasand beans, patches of most coarse vegetable substitutes for wheat.On inanimate nature, as on the men and women who cultivated it,a prevalent tendency towards an appearance of vegetatingunwillingly--a dejected disposition to give up, and wither away.Monsieur the Marquis in his travelling carriage (which might havebeen lighter), conducted by four post-horses and two postilions,fagged up a steep hill.  A blush on the countenance of Monsieur theMarquis was no impeachment of his high breeding; it was not fromwithin; it was occasioned by an external circumstance beyond hiscontrol--the setting sun.The sunset struck so brilliantly into the travelling carriage when itgained the hill-top, that its occupant was steeped in crimson."It will die out," said Monsieur the Marquis, glancing at his hands,"directly."In effect, the sun was so low that it dipped at the moment.  When theheavy drag had been adjusted to the wheel, and the carriage slid downhill, with a cinderous smell, in a cloud of dust, the red glow departedquickly; the sun and the Marquis going down together, there was noglow left when the drag was taken off.But, there remained a broken country, bold and open, a little villageat the bottom of the hill, a broad sweep and rise beyond it, a church-tower, a windmill, a forest for the chase, and a crag with a fortresson it used as a prison.  Round upon all these darkening objects asthe night drew on, the Marquis looked, with the air of one who wascoming near home.The village had its one poor street, with its poor brewery, poortannery, poor tavern, poor stable-yard for relays of post-horses,poor fountain, all usual poor appointments.  It had its poor peopletoo.  All its people were poor, and many of them were sitting attheir doors, shredding spare onions and the like for supper, whilemany were at the fountain, washing leaves, and grasses, and any suchsmall yieldings of the earth that could be eaten.  Expressive sips ofwhat made them poor, were not wanting; the tax for the state, the taxfor the church, the tax for the lord, tax local and tax general, wereto be paid here and to be paid there, according to solemn inscriptionin the little village, until the wonder was, that there was anyvillage left unswallowed.Few children were to be seen, and no dogs.  As to the men and women,their choice on earth was stated in the prospect--Life on the lowestterms that could sustain it, down in the little village under themill; or captivity and Death in the dominant prison on the crag.Heralded by a courier in advance, and by the cracking of hispostilions' whips, which twined snake-like about their heads in theevening air, as if he came attended by the Furies, Monsieur theMarquis drew up in his travelling carriage at the posting-house gate.It was hard by the fountain, and the peasants suspended theiroperations to look at him.  He looked at them, and saw in them,without knowing it, the slow sure filing down of misery-worn face andfigure, that was to make the meagreness of Frenchmen an Englishsuperstition which should survive the truth through the best part ofa hundred years.Monsieur the Marquis cast his eyes over the submissive faces thatdrooped before him, as the like of himself had drooped beforeMonseigneur of the Court--only the difference was, that these facesdrooped merely to suffer and not to propitiate--when a grizzledmender of the roads joined the group."Bring me hither that fellow!" said the Marquis to the courier.The fellow was brought, cap in hand, and the other fellows closedround to look and listen, in the manner of the people at the Parisfountain."I passed you on the road?""Monseigneur, it is true.  I had the honour of being passed on the road.""Coming up the hill, and at the top of the hill, both?""Monseigneur, it is true.""What did you look at, so fixedly?""Monseigneur, I looked at the man."He stooped a little, and with his tattered blue cap pointed under thecarriage.  All his fellows stooped to look under the carriage."What man, pig?  And why look there?""Pardon, Monseigneur; he swung by the chain of the shoe--the drag.""Who?" demanded the traveller."Monseigneur, the man.""May the Devil carry away these idiots!  How do you call the man?You know all the men of this part of the country.  Who was he?""Your clemency, Monseigneur!  He was not of this part of the country.Of all the days of my life, I never saw him.""Swinging by the chain?  To be suffocated?""With your gracious permission, that was the wonder of it,Monseigneur.  His head hanging over--like this!"He turned himself sideways to the carriage, and leaned back, with hisface thrown up to the sky, and his head hanging down; then recoveredhimself, fumbled with his cap, and made a bow."What was he like?""Monseigneur, he was whiter than the miller.  All covered with dust,white as a spectre, tall as a spectre!"The picture produced an immense sensation in the little crowd;but all eyes, without comparing notes with other eyes, looked atMonsieur the Marquis.  Perhaps, to observe whether he had any spectreon his conscience."Truly, you did well," said the Marquis, felicitously sensible thatsuch vermin were not to ruffle him, "to see a thief accompanying mycarriage, and not open that great mouth of yours.  Bah!  Put him aside,Monsieur Gabelle!"Monsieur Gabelle was the Postmaster, and some other taxing functionaryunited; he had come out with great obsequiousness to assist at thisexamination, and had held the examined by the drapery of his arm inan official manner."Bah!  Go aside!" said Monsieur Gabelle."Lay hands on this stranger if he seeks to lodge in your villageto-night, and be sure that his business is honest, Gabelle.""Monseigneur, I am flattered to devote myself to your orders.""Did he run away, fellow?--where is that Accursed?"The accursed was already under the carriage with some half-dozenparticular friends, pointing out the chain with his blue cap.Some half-dozen other particular friends promptly hauled him out,and presented him breathless to Monsieur the Marquis."Did the man run away, Dolt, when we stopped for the drag?""Monseigneur, he precipitated himself over the hill-side, head first,as a person plunges into the river.""See to it, Gabelle.  Go on!"The half-dozen who were peering at the chain were still among thewheels, like sheep; the wheels turned so suddenly that they werelucky to save their skins and bones; they had very little else tosave, or they might not have been so fortunate.The burst with which the carriage started out of the village and upthe rise beyond, was soon checked by the steepness of the hill.Gradually, it subsided to a foot pace, swinging and lumbering upwardamong the many sweet scents of a summer night.  The postilions, witha thousand gossamer gnats circling about them in lieu of the Furies,quietly mended the points to the lashes of their whips; the valetwalked by the horses; the courier was audible, trotting on ahead intothe dun distance.At the steepest point of the hill there was a little burial-ground,with a Cross and a new large figure of Our Saviour on it; it was apoor figure in wood, done by some inexperienced rustic carver, but hehad studied the figure from the life--his own life, maybe--for it wasdreadfully spare and thin.To this distressful emblem of a great distress that had long beengrowing worse, and was not at its worst, a woman was kneeling.She turned her head as the carriage came up to her, rose quickly,and presented herself at the carriage-door."It is you, Monseigneur!  Monseigneur, a petition."With an exclamation of impatience, but with his unchangeable face,Monseigneur looked out."How, then!  What is it?  Always petitions!""Monseigneur.  For the love of the great God!  My husband, the forester.""What of your husband, the forester?  Always the same with you people.He cannot pay something?""He has paid all, Monseigneur.  He is dead.""Well!  He is quiet.  Can I restore him to you?""Alas, no, Monseigneur!  But he lies yonder, under a little heap ofpoor grass.""Well?""Monseigneur, there are so many little heaps of poor grass?""Again, well?"She looked an old woman, but was young.  Her manner was one ofpassionate grief; by turns she clasped her veinous and knotted handstogether with wild energy, and laid one of them on the carriage-door--tenderly, caressingly, as if it had been a human breast, and couldbe expected to feel the appealing touch."Monseigneur, hear me!  Monseigneur, hear my petition!  My husbanddied of want; so many die of want; so many more will die of want.""Again, well?  Can I feed them?""Monseigneur, the good God knows; but I don't ask it.  My petition is,that a morsel of stone or wood, with my husband's name, may be placedover him to show where he lies.  Otherwise, the place will be quicklyforgotten, it will never be found when I am dead of the same malady,I shall be laid under some other heap of poor grass.  Monseigneur,they are so many, they increase so fast, there is so much want.Monseigneur!  Monseigneur!"The valet had put her away from the door, the carriage had brokeninto a brisk trot, the postilions had quickened the pace, she wasleft far behind, and Monseigneur, again escorted by the Furies, wasrapidly diminishing the league or two of distance that remainedbetween him and his chateau.The sweet scents of the summer night rose all around him, and rose,as the rain falls, impartially, on the dusty, ragged, and toil-worngroup at the fountain not far away; to whom the mender of roads, withthe aid of the blue cap without which he was nothing, still enlargedupon his man like a spectre, as long as they could bear it.By degrees, as they could bear no more, they dropped off one by one,and lights twinkled in little casements; which lights, as thecasements darkened, and more stars came out, seemed to have shot upinto the sky instead of having been extinguished.The shadow of a large high-roofed house, and of many over-hangingtrees, was upon Monsieur the Marquis by that time; and the shadow wasexchanged for the light of a flambeau, as his carriage stopped,and the great door of his chateau was opened to him."Monsieur Charles, whom I expect; is he arrived from England?""Monseigneur, not yet."IXThe Gorgon's HeadIt was a heavy mass of building, that chateau of Monsieur the Marquis,with a large stone courtyard before it, and two stone sweeps ofstaircase meeting in a stone terrace before the principal door.A stony business altogether, with heavy stone balustrades, and stoneurns, and stone flowers, and stone faces of men, and stone heads oflions, in all directions.  As if the Gorgon's head had surveyed it,when it was finished, two centuries ago.Up the broad flight of shallow steps, Monsieur the Marquis, flambeaupreceded, went from his carriage, sufficiently disturbing the darknessto elicit loud remonstrance from an owl in the roof of the great pileof stable building away among the trees.  All else was so quiet, thatthe flambeau carried up the steps, and the other flambeau held at thegreat door, burnt as if they were in a close room of state, insteadof being in the open night-air.  Other sound than the owl's voicethere was none, save the failing of a fountain into its stone basin;for, it was one of those dark nights that hold their breath by the hourtogether, and then heave a long low sigh, and hold their breath again.The great door clanged behind him, and Monsieur the Marquis crosseda hall grim with certain old boar-spears, swords, and knives of thechase; grimmer with certain heavy riding-rods and riding-whips, ofwhich many a peasant, gone to his benefactor Death, had felt theweight when his lord was angry.Avoiding the larger rooms, which were dark and made fast for thenight, Monsieur the Marquis, with his flambeau-bearer going on before,went up the staircase to a door in a corridor.  This thrown open,admitted him to his own private apartment of three rooms:his bed-chamber and two others.  High vaulted rooms with cooluncarpeted floors, great dogs upon the hearths for the burningof wood in winter time, and all luxuries befitting the stateof a marquis in a luxurious age and country.  The fashionof the last Louis but one, of the line that was never to break--the fourteenth Louis--was conspicuous in their rich furniture;but, it was diversified by many objects that were illustrationsof old pages in the history of France.A supper-table was laid for two, in the third of the rooms; a roundroom, in one of the chateau's four extinguisher-topped towers.A small lofty room, with its window wide open, and the woodenjalousie-blinds closed, so that the dark night only showed in slighthorizontal lines of black, alternating with their broad lines ofstone colour."My nephew," said the Marquis, glancing at the supper preparation;"they said he was not arrived."Nor was he; but, he had been expected with Monseigneur."Ah!  It is not probable he will arrive to-night; nevertheless, leavethe table as it is.  I shall be ready in a quarter of an hour."In a quarter of an hour Monseigneur was ready, and sat down aloneto his sumptuous and choice supper.  His chair was opposite to thewindow, and he had taken his soup, and was raising his glass ofBordeaux to his lips, when he put it down."What is that?" he calmly asked, looking with attention at thehorizontal lines of black and stone colour."Monseigneur?  That?""Outside the blinds.  Open the blinds."It was done."Well?""Monseigneur, it is nothing.  The trees and the night are all thatare here."The servant who spoke, had thrown the blinds wide, had looked outinto the vacant darkness, and stood with that blank behind him,looking round for instructions."Good," said the imperturbable master.  "Close them again."That was done too, and the Marquis went on with his supper.  He washalf way through it, when he again stopped with his glass in hishand, hearing the sound of wheels.  It came on briskly, and came upto the front of the chateau."Ask who is arrived."It was the nephew of Monseigneur.  He had been some few leaguesbehind Monseigneur, early in the afternoon.  He had diminished thedistance rapidly, but not so rapidly as to come up with Monseigneuron the road.  He had heard of Monseigneur, at the posting-houses,as being before him.He was to be told (said Monseigneur) that supper awaited him then andthere, and that he was prayed to come to it.  In a little while he came.He had been known in England as Charles Darnay.Monseigneur received him in a courtly manner, but they did not shake hands."You left Paris yesterday, sir?" he said to Monseigneur, as he tookhis seat at table."Yesterday.  And you?""I come direct.""From London?""Yes.""You have been a long time coming," said the Marquis, with a smile."On the contrary; I come direct.""Pardon me!  I mean, not a long time on the journey; a long timeintending the journey.""I have been detained by"--the nephew stopped a moment in hisanswer--"various business.""Without doubt," said the polished uncle.So long as a servant was present, no other words passed between them.When coffee had been served and they were alone together, the nephew,looking at the uncle and meeting the eyes of the face that was like afine mask, opened a conversation."I have come back, sir, as you anticipate, pursuing the object thattook me away.  It carried me into great and unexpected peril; but itis a sacred object, and if it had carried me to death I hope it wouldhave sustained me.""Not to death," said the uncle; "it is not necessary to say, to death.""I doubt, sir," returned the nephew, "whether, if it had carried meto the utmost brink of death, you would have cared to stop me there."The deepened marks in the nose, and the lengthening of the finestraight lines in the cruel face, looked ominous as to that; theuncle made a graceful gesture of protest, which was so clearly aslight form of good breeding that it was not reassuring."Indeed, sir," pursued the nephew, "for anything I know, you mayhave expressly worked to give a more suspicious appearance to thesuspicious circumstances that surrounded me.""No, no, no," said the uncle, pleasantly."But, however that may be," resumed the nephew, glancing at him withdeep distrust, "I know that your diplomacy would stop me by anymeans, and would know no scruple as to means.""My friend, I told you so," said the uncle, with a fine pulsation inthe two marks.  "Do me the favour to recall that I told you so, long ago.""I recall it.""Thank you," said the Marquise--very sweetly indeed.His tone lingered in the air, almost like the tone of a musicalinstrument."In effect, sir," pursued the nephew, "I believe it to be at onceyour bad fortune, and my good fortune, that has kept me out of aprison in France here.""I do not quite understand," returned the uncle, sipping his coffee."Dare I ask you to explain?""I believe that if you were not in disgrace with the Court,and had not been overshadowed by that cloud for years past, a letterde cachet would have sent me to some fortress indefinitely.""It is possible," said the uncle, with great calmness.  "For thehonour of the family, I could even resolve to incommode you to thatextent.  Pray excuse me!""I perceive that, happily for me, the Reception of the day beforeyesterday was, as usual, a cold one," observed the nephew."I would not say happily, my friend," returned the uncle, withrefined politeness; "I would not be sure of that.  A good opportunityfor consideration, surrounded by the advantages of solitude, mightinfluence your destiny to far greater advantage than you influence itfor yourself.  But it is useless to discuss the question.  I am, asyou say, at a disadvantage.  These little instruments of correction,these gentle aids to the power and honour of families, these slightfavours that might so incommode you, are only to be obtained now byinterest and importunity.  They are sought by so many, and they aregranted (comparatively) to so few!  It used not to be so, but Francein all such things is changed for the worse.  Our not remoteancestors held the right of life and death over the surroundingvulgar.  From this room, many such dogs have been taken out to behanged; in the next room (my bedroom), one fellow, to our knowledge,was poniarded on the spot for professing some insolent delicacyrespecting his daughter--_his_ daughter?  We have lost many privileges;a new philosophy has become the mode; and the assertion of ourstation, in these days, might (I do not go so far as to say would,but might) cause us real inconvenience.  All very bad, very bad!"The Marquis took a gentle little pinch of snuff, and shook his head;as elegantly despondent as he could becomingly be of a country stillcontaining himself, that great means of regeneration."We have so asserted our station, both in the old time and in themodern time also," said the nephew, gloomily, "that I believe ourname to be more detested than any name in France.""Let us hope so," said the uncle.  "Detestation of the high is theinvoluntary homage of the low.""There is not," pursued the nephew, in his former tone, "a face I canlook at, in all this country round about us, which looks at me withany deference on it but the dark deference of fear and slavery.""A compliment," said the Marquis, "to the grandeur of the family,merited by the manner in which the family has sustained its grandeur.Hah!"  And he took another gentle little pinch of snuff, and lightlycrossed his legs.But, when his nephew, leaning an elbow on the table, covered his eyesthoughtfully and dejectedly with his hand, the fine mask looked at himsideways with a stronger concentration of keenness, closeness, and dislike,than was comportable with its wearer's assumption of indifference."Repression is the only lasting philosophy.  The dark deference offear and slavery, my friend," observed the Marquis, "will keep thedogs obedient to the whip, as long as this roof," looking up to it,"shuts out the sky."That might not be so long as the Marquis supposed.  If a picture ofthe chateau as it was to be a very few years hence, and of fifty likeit as they too were to be a very few years hence, could have beenshown to him that night, he might have been at a loss to claim hisown from the ghastly, fire-charred, plunder-wrecked rains.  As forthe roof he vaunted, he might have found _that_ shutting out the skyin a new way--to wit, for ever, from the eyes of the bodies into whichits lead was fired, out of the barrels of a hundred thousand muskets."Meanwhile," said the Marquis, "I will preserve the honour and reposeof the family, if you will not.  But you must be fatigued.  Shall weterminate our conference for the night?""A moment more.""An hour, if you please.""Sir," said the nephew, "we have done wrong, and are reaping thefruits of wrong.""_We_ have done wrong?" repeated the Marquis, with an inquiringsmile, and delicately pointing, first to his nephew, then to himself."Our family; our honourable family, whose honour is of so muchaccount to both of us, in such different ways.  Even in my father'stime, we did a world of wrong, injuring every human creature who camebetween us and our pleasure, whatever it was.  Why need I speak of myfather's time, when it is equally yours?  Can I separate my father'stwin-brother, joint inheritor, and next successor, from himself?""Death has done that!" said the Marquis."And has left me," answered the nephew, "bound to a system that isfrightful to me, responsible for it, but powerless in it; seeking toexecute the last request of my dear mother's lips, and obey the lastlook of my dear mother's eyes, which implored me to have mercy and toredress; and tortured by seeking assistance and power in vain.""Seeking them from me, my nephew," said the Marquis, touching him onthe breast with his forefinger--they were now standing by thehearth--"you will for ever seek them in vain, be assured."Every fine straight line in the clear whiteness of his face, wascruelly, craftily, and closely compressed, while he stood lookingquietly at his nephew, with his snuff-box in his hand.  Once again hetouched him on the breast, as though his finger were the fine pointof a small sword, with which, in delicate finesse, he ran him throughthe body, and said,"My friend, I will die, perpetuating the system under which I have lived."When he had said it, he took a culminating pinch of snuff, and puthis box in his pocket."Better to be a rational creature," he added then, after ringing asmall bell on the table, "and accept your natural destiny.  But youare lost, Monsieur Charles, I see.""This property and France are lost to me," said the nephew, sadly;"I renounce them.""Are they both yours to renounce?  France may be, but is the property?It is scarcely worth mentioning; but, is it yet?""I had no intention, in the words I used, to claim it yet.  If itpassed to me from you, to-morrow--""Which I have the vanity to hope is not probable.""--or twenty years hence--""You do me too much honour," said the Marquis; "still, I prefer thatsupposition.""--I would abandon it, and live otherwise and elsewhere.  It islittle to relinquish.  What is it but a wilderness of misery and ruin!""Hah!" said the Marquis, glancing round the luxurious room."To the eye it is fair enough, here; but seen in its integrity, underthe sky, and by the daylight, it is a crumbling tower of waste,mismanagement, extortion, debt, mortgage, oppression, hunger,nakedness, and suffering.""Hah!" said the Marquis again, in a well-satisfied manner."If it ever becomes mine, it shall be put into some hands betterqualified to free it slowly (if such a thing is possible) from theweight that drags it down, so that the miserable people who cannotleave it and who have been long wrung to the last point of endurance,may, in another generation, suffer less; but it is not for me.There is a curse on it, and on all this land.""And you?" said the uncle.  "Forgive my curiosity; do you, under yournew philosophy, graciously intend to live?""I must do, to live, what others of my countrymen, even with nobilityat their backs, may have to do some day-work.""In England, for example?""Yes.  The family honour, sir, is safe from me in this country.  Thefamily name can suffer from me in no other, for I bear it in no other."The ringing of the bell had caused the adjoining bed-chamber to belighted.  It now shone brightly, through the door of communication.The Marquis looked that way, and listened for the retreating step ofhis valet."England is very attractive to you, seeing how indifferently you haveprospered there," he observed then, turning his calm face to hisnephew with a smile."I have already said, that for my prospering there, I am sensible Imay be indebted to you, sir.  For the rest, it is my Refuge.""They say, those boastful English, that it is the Refuge of many.You know a compatriot who has found a Refuge there?  A Doctor?""Yes.""With a daughter?""Yes.""Yes," said the Marquis.  "You are fatigued.  Good night!"As he bent his head in his most courtly manner, there was a secrecyin his smiling face, and he conveyed an air of mystery to thosewords, which struck the eyes and ears of his nephew forcibly.  At thesame time, the thin straight lines of the setting of the eyes, andthe thin straight lips, and the markings in the nose, curved with asarcasm that looked handsomely diabolic."Yes," repeated the Marquis.  "A Doctor with a daughter.  Yes.So commences the new philosophy!  You are fatigued.  Good night!"It would have been of as much avail to interrogate any stone faceoutside the chateau as to interrogate that face of his.  The nephewlooked at him, in vain, in passing on to the door."Good night!" said the uncle.  "I look to the pleasure of seeing youagain in the morning.  Good repose!  Light Monsieur my nephew to hischamber there!--And burn Monsieur my nephew in his bed, if you will,"he added to himself, before he rang his little bell again, and summonedhis valet to his own bedroom.The valet come and gone, Monsieur the Marquis walked to and fro inhis loose chamber-robe, to prepare himself gently for sleep, that hotstill night.  Rustling about the room, his softly-slippered feetmaking no noise on the floor, he moved like a refined tiger:--lookedlike some enchanted marquis of the impenitently wicked sort, in story,whose periodical change into tiger form was either just going off, orjust coming on.He moved from end to end of his voluptuous bedroom, looking again atthe scraps of the day's journey that came unbidden into his mind; theslow toil up the hill at sunset, the setting sun, the descent, themill, the prison on the crag, the little village in the hollow, thepeasants at the fountain, and the mender of roads with his blue cappointing out the chain under the carriage.  That fountain suggestedthe Paris fountain, the little bundle lying on the step, the womenbending over it, and the tall man with his arms up, crying, "Dead!""I am cool now," said Monsieur the Marquis, "and may go to bed."So, leaving only one light burning on the large hearth, he let histhin gauze curtains fall around him, and heard the night break itssilence with a long sigh as he composed himself to sleep.The stone faces on the outer walls stared blindly at the black nightfor three heavy hours; for three heavy hours, the horses in thestables rattled at their racks, the dogs barked, and the owl made anoise with very little resemblance in it to the noise conventionallyassigned to the owl by men-poets.  But it is the obstinate custom ofsuch creatures hardly ever to say what is set down for them.For three heavy hours, the stone faces of the chateau, lion andhuman, stared blindly at the night.  Dead darkness lay on all thelandscape, dead darkness added its own hush to the hushing dust onall the roads.  The burial-place had got to the pass that its littleheaps of poor grass were undistinguishable from one another; thefigure on the Cross might have come down, for anything that could beseen of it.  In the village, taxers and taxed were fast asleep.Dreaming, perhaps, of banquets, as the starved usually do, and ofease and rest, as the driven slave and the yoked ox may, its leaninhabitants slept soundly, and were fed and freed.The fountain in the village flowed unseen and unheard, and thefountain at the chateau dropped unseen and unheard--both meltingaway, like the minutes that were falling from the spring of Time--through three dark hours.  Then, the grey water of both began to beghostly in the light, and the eyes of the stone faces of the chateauwere opened.Lighter and lighter, until at last the sun touched the tops of thestill trees, and poured its radiance over the hill.  In the glow,the water of the chateau fountain seemed to turn to blood, and thestone faces crimsoned.  The carol of the birds was loud and high,and, on the weather-beaten sill of the great window of the bed-chamber of Monsieur the Marquis, one little bird sang its sweetestsong with all its might.  At this, the nearest stone face seemedto stare amazed, and, with open mouth and dropped under-jaw, lookedawe-stricken.Now, the sun was full up, and movement began in the village.Casement windows opened, crazy doors were unbarred, and people cameforth shivering--chilled, as yet, by the new sweet air.  Then beganthe rarely lightened toil of the day among the village population.Some, to the fountain; some, to the fields; men and women here, todig and delve; men and women there, to see to the poor live stock,and lead the bony cows out, to such pasture as could be found by theroadside.  In the church and at the Cross, a kneeling figure or two;attendant on the latter prayers, the led cow, trying for a breakfastamong the weeds at its foot.The chateau awoke later, as became its quality, but awoke graduallyand surely.  First, the lonely boar-spears and knives of the chasehad been reddened as of old; then, had gleamed trenchant in themorning sunshine; now, doors and windows were thrown open, horsesin their stables looked round over their shoulders at the light andfreshness pouring in at doorways, leaves sparkled and rustled atiron-grated windows, dogs pulled hard at their chains, and rearedimpatient to be loosed.All these trivial incidents belonged to the routine of life, and thereturn of morning.  Surely, not so the ringing of the great bell ofthe chateau, nor the running up and down the stairs; nor the hurriedfigures on the terrace; nor the booting and tramping here and thereand everywhere, nor the quick saddling of horses and riding away?What winds conveyed this hurry to the grizzled mender of roads,already at work on the hill-top beyond the village, with his day'sdinner (not much to carry) lying in a bundle that it was worth nocrow's while to peck at, on a heap of stones?  Had the birds, carryingsome grains of it to a distance, dropped one over him as they sowchance seeds?  Whether or no, the mender of roads ran, on the sultrymorning, as if for his life, down the hill, knee-high in dust, andnever stopped till he got to the fountain.All the people of the village were at the fountain, standing about intheir depressed manner, and whispering low, but showing no otheremotions than grim curiosity and surprise.  The led cows, hastilybrought in and tethered to anything that would hold them, were lookingstupidly on, or lying down chewing the cud of nothing particularlyrepaying their trouble, which they had picked up in their interruptedsaunter.  Some of the people of the chateau, and some of those of theposting-house, and all the taxing authorities, were armed more or less,and were crowded on the other side of the little street in apurposeless way, that was highly fraught with nothing.  Already,the mender of roads had penetrated into the midst of a group of fiftyparticular friends, and was smiting himself in the breast with hisblue cap.  What did all this portend, and what portended the swifthoisting-up of Monsieur Gabelle behind a servant on horseback, andthe conveying away of the said Gabelle (double-laden though the horsewas), at a gallop, like a new version of the German ballad of Leonora?It portended that there was one stone face too many, up at the chateau.The Gorgon had surveyed the building again in the night, and hadadded the one stone face wanting; the stone face for which it hadwaited through about two hundred years.It lay back on the pillow of Monsieur the Marquis.  It was like afine mask, suddenly startled, made angry, and petrified.  Driven homeinto the heart of the stone figure attached to it, was a knife.Round its hilt was a frill of paper, on which was scrawled:"Drive him fast to his tomb.  This, from Jacques."XTwo PromisesMore months, to the number of twelve, had come and gone, and Mr.Charles Darnay was established in England as a higher teacher of theFrench language who was conversant with French literature.  In thisage, he would have been a Professor; in that age, he was a Tutor.He read with young men who could find any leisure and interest forthe study of a living tongue spoken all over the world, and hecultivated a taste for its stores of knowledge and fancy.  He couldwrite of them, besides, in sound English, and render them into soundEnglish.  Such masters were not at that time easily found; Princesthat had been, and Kings that were to be, were not yet of the Teacherclass, and no ruined nobility had dropped out of Tellson's ledgers,to turn cooks and carpenters.  As a tutor, whose attainments made thestudent's way unusually pleasant and profitable, and as an eleganttranslator who brought something to his work besides mere dictionaryknowledge, young Mr. Darnay soon became known and encouraged.  He waswell acquainted, more-over, with the circumstances of his country,and those were of ever-growing interest.  So, with great perseveranceand untiring industry, he prospered.In London, he had expected neither to walk on pavements of gold, norto lie on beds of roses; if he had had any such exalted expectation,he would not have prospered.  He had expected labour, and he found it,and did it and made the best of it.  In this, his prosperity consisted.A certain portion of his time was passed at Cambridge, where he readwith undergraduates as a sort of tolerated smuggler who drove acontraband trade in European languages, instead of conveying Greekand Latin through the Custom-house.  The rest of his time he passedin London.Now, from the days when it was always summer in Eden, to these dayswhen it is mostly winter in fallen latitudes, the world of a man hasinvariably gone one way--Charles Darnay's way--the way of the love ofa woman.He had loved Lucie Manette from the hour of his danger.  He had neverheard a sound so sweet and dear as the sound of her compassionatevoice; he had never seen a face so tenderly beautiful, as hers whenit was confronted with his own on the edge of the grave that had beendug for him.  But, he had not yet spoken to her on the subject;the assassination at the deserted chateau far away beyond the heavingwater and the long, long, dusty roads--the solid stone chateau whichhad itself become the mere mist of a dream--had been done a year,and he had never yet, by so much as a single spoken word, disclosedto her the state of his heart.That he had his reasons for this, he knew full well.  It was again asummer day when, lately arrived in London from his college occupation,he turned into the quiet corner in Soho, bent on seeking an opportunityof opening his mind to Doctor Manette.  It was the close of thesummer day, and he knew Lucie to be out with Miss Pross.He found the Doctor reading in his arm-chair at a window.  The energywhich had at once supported him under his old sufferings and aggravatedtheir sharpness, had been gradually restored to him.  He was now avery energetic man indeed, with great firmness of purpose, strengthof resolution, and vigour of action.  In his recovered energy he wassometimes a little fitful and sudden, as he had at first been in theexercise of his other recovered faculties; but, this had never beenfrequently observable, and had grown more and more rare.He studied much, slept little, sustained a great deal of fatigue withease, and was equably cheerful.  To him, now entered Charles Darnay,at sight of whom he laid aside his book and held out his hand."Charles Darnay!  I rejoice to see you.  We have been counting on yourreturn these three or four days past.  Mr. Stryver and Sydney Cartonwere both here yesterday, and both made you out to be more than due.""I am obliged to them for their interest in the matter," he answered,a little coldly as to them, though very warmly as to the Doctor."Miss Manette--""Is well," said the Doctor, as he stopped short, "and your returnwill delight us all.  She has gone out on some household matters,but will soon be home.""Doctor Manette, I knew she was from home.  I took the opportunity ofher being from home, to beg to speak to you."There was a blank silence."Yes?" said the Doctor, with evident constraint.  "Bring your chair here,and speak on."He complied as to the chair, but appeared to find the speaking onless easy."I have had the happiness, Doctor Manette, of being so intimatehere," so he at length began, "for some year and a half, that I hopethe topic on which I am about to touch may not--"He was stayed by the Doctor's putting out his hand to stop him.When he had kept it so a little while, he said, drawing it back:"Is Lucie the topic?""She is.""It is hard for me to speak of her at any time.  It is very hard forme to hear her spoken of in that tone of yours, Charles Darnay.""It is a tone of fervent admiration, true homage, and deep love,Doctor Manette!" he said deferentially.There was another blank silence before her father rejoined:"I believe it.  I do you justice; I believe it."His constraint was so manifest, and it was so manifest, too, that itoriginated in an unwillingness to approach the subject, that CharlesDarnay hesitated."Shall I go on, sir?"Another blank."Yes, go on.""You anticipate what I would say, though you cannot know how earnestlyI say it, how earnestly I feel it, without knowing my secret heart,and the hopes and fears and anxieties with which it has long beenladen.  Dear Doctor Manette, I love your daughter fondly, dearly,disinterestedly, devotedly.  If ever there were love in the world,I love her.  You have loved yourself; let your old love speak for me!"The Doctor sat with his face turned away, and his eyes bent on theground.  At the last words, he stretched out his hand again, hurriedly,and cried:"Not that, sir!  Let that be!  I adjure you, do not recall that!"His cry was so like a cry of actual pain, that it rang in CharlesDarnay's ears long after he had ceased.  He motioned with the hand hehad extended, and it seemed to be an appeal to Darnay to pause.The latter so received it, and remained silent."I ask your pardon," said the Doctor, in a subdued tone, after somemoments.  "I do not doubt your loving Lucie; you may be satisfied of it."He turned towards him in his chair, but did not look at him, or raisehis eyes.  His chin dropped upon his hand, and his white hairovershadowed his face:"Have you spoken to Lucie?""No.""Nor written?""Never.""It would be ungenerous to affect not to know that your self-denialis to be referred to your consideration for her father.  Her fatherthanks you."He offered his hand; but his eyes did not go with it."I know," said Darnay, respectfully, "how can I fail to know,Doctor Manette, I who have seen you together from day to day,that between you and Miss Manette there is an affection so unusual,so touching, so belonging to the circumstances in which it has beennurtured, that it can have few parallels, even in the tendernessbetween a father and child.  I know, Doctor Manette--how can I failto know--that, mingled with the affection and duty of a daughter whohas become a woman, there is, in her heart, towards you, all the loveand reliance of infancy itself.  I know that, as in her childhood shehad no parent, so she is now devoted to you with all the constancyand fervour of her present years and character, united to thetrustfulness and attachment of the early days in which you were lostto her.  I know perfectly well that if you had been restored to herfrom the world beyond this life, you could hardly be invested, in hersight, with a more sacred character than that in which you are alwayswith her.  I know that when she is clinging to you, the hands of baby,girl, and woman, all in one, are round your neck.  I know that inloving you she sees and loves her mother at her own age, sees andloves you at my age, loves her mother broken-hearted, loves youthrough your dreadful trial and in your blessed restoration.  I haveknown this, night and day, since I have known you in your home."Her father sat silent, with his face bent down.  His breathing was alittle quickened; but he repressed all other signs of agitation."Dear Doctor Manette, always knowing this, always seeing her and youwith this hallowed light about you, I have forborne, and forborne,as long as it was in the nature of man to do it.  I have felt, and doeven now feel, that to bring my love--even mine--between you, is totouch your history with something not quite so good as itself.But I love her.  Heaven is my witness that I love her!""I believe it," answered her father, mournfully.  "I have thought sobefore now.  I believe it.""But, do not believe," said Darnay, upon whose ear the mournful voicestruck with a reproachful sound, "that if my fortune were so cast asthat, being one day so happy as to make her my wife, I must at anytime put any separation between her and you, I could or would breathea word of what I now say.  Besides that I should know it to behopeless, I should know it to be a baseness.  If I had any suchpossibility, even at a remote distance of years, harboured in mythoughts, and hidden in my heart--if it ever had been there--if itever could be there--I could not now touch this honoured hand."He laid his own upon it as he spoke."No, dear Doctor Manette.  Like you, a voluntary exile from France;like you, driven from it by its distractions, oppressions, andmiseries; like you, striving to live away from it by my own exertions,and trusting in a happier future; I look only to sharing your fortunes,sharing your life and home, and being faithful to you to the death.Not to divide with Lucie her privilege as your child, companion, andfriend; but to come in aid of it, and bind her closer to you, if sucha thing can be."His touch still lingered on her father's hand.  Answering the touchfor a moment, but not coldly, her father rested his hands upon thearms of his chair, and looked up for the first time since thebeginning of the conference.  A struggle was evidently in his face;a struggle with that occasional look which had a tendency in it todark doubt and dread."You speak so feelingly and so manfully, Charles Darnay, that I thankyou with all my heart, and will open all my heart--or nearly so.Have you any reason to believe that Lucie loves you?""None.  As yet, none.""Is it the immediate object of this confidence, that you may at onceascertain that, with my knowledge?""Not even so.  I might not have the hopefulness to do it for weeks;I might (mistaken or not mistaken) have that hopefulness to-morrow.""Do you seek any guidance from me?""I ask none, sir.  But I have thought it possible that you might haveit in your power, if you should deem it right, to give me some.""Do you seek any promise from me?""I do seek that.""What is it?""I well understand that, without you, I could have no hope.  I wellunderstand that, even if Miss Manette held me at this moment in herinnocent heart--do not think I have the presumption to assume so much--I could retain no place in it against her love for her father.""If that be so, do you see what, on the other hand, is involved in it?""I understand equally well, that a word from her father in any suitor'sfavour, would outweigh herself and all the world.  For which reason,Doctor Manette," said Darnay, modestly but firmly, "I would not askthat word, to save my life.""I am sure of it.  Charles Darnay, mysteries arise out of close love,as well as out of wide division; in the former case, they are subtleand delicate, and difficult to penetrate.  My daughter Lucie is, inthis one respect, such a mystery to me; I can make no guess at thestate of her heart.""May I ask, sir, if you think she is--" As he hesitated, her fathersupplied the rest."Is sought by any other suitor?""It is what I meant to say."Her father considered a little before he answered:"You have seen Mr. Carton here, yourself.  Mr. Stryver is here too,occasionally.  If it be at all, it can only be by one of these.""Or both," said Darnay."I had not thought of both; I should not think either, likely.You want a promise from me.  Tell me what it is.""It is, that if Miss Manette should bring to you at any time, on herown part, such a confidence as I have ventured to lay before you,you will bear testimony to what I have said, and to your belief in it.I hope you may be able to think so well of me, as to urge no influenceagainst me.  I say nothing more of my stake in this; this is what I ask.The condition on which I ask it, and which you have an undoubted rightto require, I will observe immediately.""I give the promise," said the Doctor, "without any condition.I believe your object to be, purely and truthfully, as you havestated it.  I believe your intention is to perpetuate, and not toweaken, the ties between me and my other and far dearer self.  If sheshould ever tell me that you are essential to her perfect happiness,I will give her to you.  If there were--Charles Darnay, if there were--"The young man had taken his hand gratefully; their hands were joinedas the Doctor spoke:"--any fancies, any reasons, any apprehensions, anything whatsoever,new or old, against the man she really loved--the direct responsibilitythereof not lying on his head--they should all be obliterated for hersake.  She is everything to me; more to me than suffering, more to methan wrong, more to me--Well!  This is idle talk."So strange was the way in which he faded into silence, and so strangehis fixed look when he had ceased to speak, that Darnay felt his ownhand turn cold in the hand that slowly released and dropped it."You said something to me," said Doctor Manette, breaking into a smile."What was it you said to me?"He was at a loss how to answer, until he remembered having spoken ofa condition.  Relieved as his mind reverted to that, he answered:"Your confidence in me ought to be returned with full confidence onmy part.  My present name, though but slightly changed from mymother's, is not, as you will remember, my own.  I wish to tell youwhat that is, and why I am in England.""Stop!" said the Doctor of Beauvais."I wish it, that I may the better deserve your confidence, and haveno secret from you.""Stop!"For an instant, the Doctor even had his two hands at his ears; foranother instant, even had his two hands laid on Darnay's lips."Tell me when I ask you, not now.  If your suit should prosper, ifLucie should love you, you shall tell me on your marriage morning.Do you promise?""Willingly."Give me your hand.  She will be home directly, and it is better sheshould not see us together to-night.  Go!  God bless you!"It was dark when Charles Darnay left him, and it was an hour laterand darker when Lucie came home; she hurried into the room alone--for Miss Pross had gone straight up-stairs--and was surprised to findhis reading-chair empty."My father!" she called to him.  "Father dear!"Nothing was said in answer, but she heard a low hammering sound inhis bedroom.  Passing lightly across the intermediate room, shelooked in at his door and came running back frightened, crying toherself, with her blood all chilled, "What shall I do!  What shall I do!"Her uncertainty lasted but a moment; she hurried back, and tapped athis door, and softly called to him.  The noise ceased at the sound ofher voice, and he presently came out to her, and they walked up anddown together for a long time.She came down from her bed, to look at him in his sleep that night.He slept heavily, and his tray of shoemaking tools, and his oldunfinished work, were all as usual.XIA Companion Picture"Sydney," said Mr. Stryver, on that self-same night, or morning, to hisjackal; "mix another bowl of punch; I have something to say to you."Sydney had been working double tides that night, and the night before,and the night before that, and a good many nights in succession, makinga grand clearance among Mr. Stryver's papers before the setting in ofthe long vacation.  The clearance was effected at last; the Stryverarrears were handsomely fetched up; everything was got rid of untilNovember should come with its fogs atmospheric, and fogs legal, andbring grist to the mill again.Sydney was none the livelier and none the soberer for so much application.It had taken a deal of extra wet-towelling to pull him through the night;a correspondingly extra quantity of wine had preceded the towelling;and he was in a very damaged condition, as he now pulled his turbanoff and threw it into the basin in which he had steeped it at intervalsfor the last six hours."Are you mixing that other bowl of punch?" said Stryver the portly,with his hands in his waistband, glancing round from the sofa wherehe lay on his back."I am.""Now, look here!  I am going to tell you something that will rathersurprise you, and that perhaps will make you think me not quite asshrewd as you usually do think me.  I intend to marry.""_Do_ you?""Yes.  And not for money.  What do you say now?""I don't feel disposed to say much.  Who is she?""Guess.""Do I know her?""Guess.""I am not going to guess, at five o'clock in the morning, with mybrains frying and sputtering in my head. If you want me to guess, youmust ask me to dinner.""Well then, I'll tell you," said Stryver, coming slowly into a sittingposture.  "Sydney, I rather despair of making myself intelligible to you,because you are such an insensible dog.""And you," returned Sydney, busy concocting the punch, "are such asensitive and poetical spirit--""Come!" rejoined Stryver, laughing boastfully, "though I don't preferany claim to being the soul of Romance (for I hope I know better),still I am a tenderer sort of fellow than _you_.""You are a luckier, if you mean that.""I don't mean that.  I mean I am a man of more--more--""Say gallantry, while you are about it," suggested Carton."Well!  I'll say gallantry.  My meaning is that I am a man," saidStryver, inflating himself at his friend as he made the punch,"who cares more to be agreeable, who takes more pains to be agreeable,who knows better how to be agreeable, in a woman's society, than you do.""Go on," said Sydney Carton."No; but before I go on," said Stryver, shaking his head in his bullyingway, "I'll have this out with you.  You've been at Doctor Manette'shouse as much as I have, or more than I have.  Why, I have been ashamedof your moroseness there!  Your manners have been of that silent andsullen and hangdog kind, that, upon my life and soul, I have beenashamed of you, Sydney!""It should be very beneficial to a man in your practice at the bar,to be ashamed of anything," returned Sydney; "you ought to be muchobliged to me.""You shall not get off in that way," rejoined Stryver, shouldering therejoinder at him; "no, Sydney, it's my duty to tell you--and I tell youto your face to do you good--that you are a devilish ill-conditionedfellow in that sort of society.  You are a disagreeable fellow."Sydney drank a bumper of the punch he had made, and laughed."Look at me!" said Stryver, squaring himself; "I have less need tomake myself agreeable than you have, being more independent incircumstances.  Why do I do it?""I never saw you do it yet," muttered Carton."I do it because it's politic; I do it on principle.  And look at me!I get on.""You don't get on with your account of your matrimonial intentions,"answered Carton, with a careless air; "I wish you would keep to that.As to me--will you never understand that I am incorrigible?"He asked the question with some appearance of scorn."You have no business to be incorrigible," was his friend's answer,delivered in no very soothing tone."I have no business to be, at all, that I know of," said Sydney Carton."Who is the lady?""Now, don't let my announcement of the name make you uncomfortable,Sydney," said Mr. Stryver, preparing him with ostentatiousfriendliness for the disclosure he was about to make, "because I knowyou don't mean half you say; and if you meant it all, it would be ofno importance.  I make this little preface, because you once mentionedthe young lady to me in slighting terms.""I did?""Certainly; and in these chambers."Sydney Carton looked at his punch and looked at his complacent friend;drank his punch and looked at his complacent friend."You made mention of the young lady as a golden-haired doll.  The younglady is Miss Manette.  If you had been a fellow of any sensitiveness ordelicacy of feeling in that kind of way, Sydney, I might have been alittle resentful of your employing such a designation; but you are not.You want that sense altogether; therefore I am no more annoyed when Ithink of the expression, than I should be annoyed by a man's opinion ofa picture of mine, who had no eye for pictures:  or of a piece of musicof mine, who had no ear for music."Sydney Carton drank the punch at a great rate; drank it by bumpers,looking at his friend."Now you know all about it, Syd," said Mr. Stryver.  "I don't careabout fortune:  she is a charming creature, and I have made up my mindto please myself:  on the whole, I think I can afford to please myself.She will have in me a man already pretty well off, and a rapidlyrising man, and a man of some distinction:  it is a piece of good fortunefor her, but she is worthy of good fortune.  Are you astonished?"Carton, still drinking the punch, rejoined, "Why should I be astonished?""You approve?"Carton, still drinking the punch, rejoined, "Why should I not approve?""Well!" said his friend Stryver, "you take it more easily than Ifancied you would, and are less mercenary on my behalf than I thoughtyou would be; though, to be sure, you know well enough by this timethat your ancient chum is a man of a pretty strong will.  Yes, Sydney,I have had enough of this style of life, with no other as a changefrom it; I feel that it is a pleasant thing for a man to have a homewhen he feels inclined to go to it (when he doesn't, he can stay away),and I feel that Miss Manette will tell well in any station, and willalways do me credit.  So I have made up my mind.  And now, Sydney,old boy, I want to say a word to _you_ about _your_ prospects.  You arein a bad way, you know; you really are in a bad way.  You don't knowthe value of money, you live hard, you'll knock up one of these days,and be ill and poor; you really ought to think about a nurse."The prosperous patronage with which he said it, made him look twiceas big as he was, and four times as offensive."Now, let me recommend you," pursued Stryver, "to look it in the face.I have looked it in the face, in my different way; look it in the face,you, in your different way.  Marry.  Provide somebody to take care of you.Never mind your having no enjoyment of women's society, nor understandingof it, nor tact for it.  Find out somebody.  Find out some respectablewoman with a little property--somebody in the landlady way, orlodging-letting way--and marry her, against a rainy day.  That's thekind of thing for _you_.  Now think of it, Sydney.""I'll think of it," said Sydney.XIIThe Fellow of DelicacyMr. Stryver having made up his mind to that magnanimous bestowal ofgood fortune on the Doctor's daughter, resolved to make her happinessknown to her before he left town for the Long Vacation.  After somemental debating of the point, he came to the conclusion that it wouldbe as well to get all the preliminaries done with, and they couldthen arrange at their leisure whether he should give her his hand aweek or two before Michaelmas Term, or in the little Christmas vacationbetween it and Hilary.As to the strength of his case, he had not a doubt about it, butclearly saw his way to the verdict.  Argued with the jury on substantialworldly grounds--the only grounds ever worth taking into account--it was a plain case, and had not a weak spot in it.  He called himselffor the plaintiff, there was no getting over his evidence, the counselfor the defendant threw up his brief, and the jury did not even turnto consider.  After trying it, Stryver, C.  J., was satisfied that noplainer case could be.Accordingly, Mr. Stryver inaugurated the Long Vacation with aformal proposal to take Miss Manette to Vauxhall Gardens; that failing,to Ranelagh; that unaccountably failing too, it behoved him to presenthimself in Soho, and there declare his noble mind.Towards Soho, therefore, Mr. Stryver shouldered his way from theTemple, while the bloom of the Long Vacation's infancy was still uponit.  Anybody who had seen him projecting himself into Soho while hewas yet on Saint Dunstan's side of Temple Bar, bursting in hisfull-blown way along the pavement, to the jostlement of all weakerpeople, might have seen how safe and strong he was.His way taking him past Tellson's, and he both banking at Tellson'sand knowing Mr. Lorry as the intimate friend of the Manettes, itentered Mr. Stryver's mind to enter the bank, and reveal to Mr. Lorrythe brightness of the Soho horizon.  So, he pushed open the door withthe weak rattle in its throat, stumbled down the two steps, got pastthe two ancient cashiers, and shouldered himself into the musty backcloset where Mr. Lorry sat at great books ruled for figures, withperpendicular iron bars to his window as if that were ruled forfigures too, and everything under the clouds were a sum."Halloa!" said Mr. Stryver.  "How do you do?  I hope you are well!"It was Stryver's grand peculiarity that he always seemed too big forany place, or space.  He was so much too big for Tellson's, thatold clerks in distant corners looked up with looks of remonstrance,as though he squeezed them against the wall.  The House itself,magnificently reading the paper quite in the far-off perspective,lowered displeased, as if the Stryver head had been butted into itsresponsible waistcoat.The discreet Mr. Lorry said, in a sample tone of the voice he wouldrecommend under the circumstances, "How do you do, Mr. Stryver?How do you do, sir?" and shook hands.  There was a peculiarity in hismanner of shaking hands, always to be seen in any clerk at Tellson'swho shook hands with a customer when the House pervaded the air.He shook in a self-abnegating way, as one who shook for Tellson and Co."Can I do anything for you, Mr. Stryver?" asked Mr. Lorry, in hisbusiness character."Why, no, thank you; this is a private visit to yourself, Mr. Lorry;I have come for a private word.""Oh indeed!" said Mr. Lorry, bending down his ear, while his eyestrayed to the House afar off."I am going," said Mr. Stryver, leaning his arms confidentially on thedesk:  whereupon, although it was a large double one, there appeared tobe not half desk enough for him:  "I am going to make an offer of myselfin marriage to your agreeable little friend, Miss Manette, Mr. Lorry.""Oh dear me!" cried Mr. Lorry, rubbing his chin, and looking at hisvisitor dubiously."Oh dear me, sir?" repeated Stryver, drawing back.  "Oh dear you, sir?What may your meaning be, Mr. Lorry?""My meaning," answered the man of business, "is, of course, friendlyand appreciative, and that it does you the greatest credit, and--in short, my meaning is everything you could desire.  But--really, youknow, Mr. Stryver--" Mr. Lorry paused, and shook his head at him inthe oddest manner, as if he were compelled against his will to add,internally, "you know there really is so much too much of you!""Well!" said Stryver, slapping the desk with his contentious hand,opening his eyes wider, and taking a long breath, "if I understandyou, Mr. Lorry, I'll be hanged!"Mr. Lorry adjusted his little wig at both ears as a means towardsthat end, and bit the feather of a pen."D--n it all, sir!" said Stryver, staring at him, "am I not eligible?""Oh dear yes!  Yes.  Oh yes, you're eligible!" said Mr. Lorry.  "If yousay eligible, you are eligible.""Am I not prosperous?" asked Stryver."Oh! if you come to prosperous, you are prosperous," said Mr. Lorry."And advancing?""If you come to advancing you know," said Mr. Lorry, delighted to beable to make another admission, "nobody can doubt that.""Then what on earth is your meaning, Mr. Lorry?" demanded Stryver,perceptibly crestfallen."Well!  I--Were you going there now?" asked Mr. Lorry."Straight!" said Stryver, with a plump of his fist on the desk."Then I think I wouldn't, if I was you.""Why?" said Stryver.  "Now, I'll put you in a corner," forensicallyshaking a forefinger at him.  "You are a man of business and boundto have a reason.  State your reason.  Why wouldn't you go?""Because," said Mr. Lorry, "I wouldn't go on such an object withouthaving some cause to believe that I should succeed.""D--n _me_!" cried Stryver, "but this beats everything."Mr. Lorry glanced at the distant House, and glanced at the angry Stryver."Here's a man of business--a man of years--a man of experience--_in_ a Bank," said Stryver; "and having summed up three leading reasonsfor complete success, he says there's no reason at all!  Says it withhis head on!"  Mr. Stryver remarked upon the peculiarity as if it wouldhave been infinitely less remarkable if he had said it with his head off."When I speak of success, I speak of success with the young lady; andwhen I speak of causes and reasons to make success probable, I speakof causes and reasons that will tell as such with the young lady.The young lady, my good sir," said Mr. Lorry, mildly tapping theStryver arm, "the young lady.  The young lady goes before all.""Then you mean to tell me, Mr. Lorry," said Stryver, squaring hiselbows, "that it is your deliberate opinion that the young lady atpresent in question is a mincing Fool?""Not exactly so.  I mean to tell you, Mr. Stryver," said Mr. Lorry,reddening, "that I will hear no disrespectful word of that young ladyfrom any lips; and that if I knew any man--which I hope I do not--whose taste was so coarse, and whose temper was so overbearing,that he could not restrain himself from speaking disrespectfully ofthat young lady at this desk, not even Tellson's should prevent mygiving him a piece of my mind."The necessity of being angry in a suppressed tone had put Mr. Stryver'sblood-vessels into a dangerous state when it was his turn to be angry;Mr. Lorry's veins, methodical as their courses could usually be,were in no better state now it was his turn."That is what I mean to tell you, sir," said Mr. Lorry."Pray let there be no mistake about it."Mr. Stryver sucked the end of a ruler for a little while, and thenstood hitting a tune out of his teeth with it, which probably gavehim the toothache.  He broke the awkward silence by saying:"This is something new to me, Mr. Lorry.  You deliberately adviseme not to go up to Soho and offer myself--_my_self, Stryver ofthe King's Bench bar?""Do you ask me for my advice, Mr. Stryver?""Yes, I do.""Very good.  Then I give it, and you have repeated it correctly.""And all I can say of it is," laughed Stryver with a vexed laugh,"that this--ha, ha!--beats everything past, present, and to come.""Now understand me," pursued Mr. Lorry.  "As a man of business, Iam not justified in saying anything about this matter, for, as a manof business, I know nothing of it.  But, as an old fellow, who hascarried Miss Manette in his arms, who is the trusted friend ofMiss Manette and of her father too, and who has a great affection forthem both, I have spoken.  The confidence is not of my seeking,recollect.  Now, you think I may not be right?""Not I!" said Stryver, whistling.  "I can't undertake to find thirdparties in common sense; I can only find it for myself.  I supposesense in certain quarters; you suppose mincing bread-and-butternonsense.  It's new to me, but you are right, I dare say.""What I suppose, Mr. Stryver, I claim to characterise for myself--Andunderstand me, sir," said Mr. Lorry, quickly flushing again,"I will not--not even at Tellson's--have it characterised for me by anygentleman breathing.""There!  I beg your pardon!" said Stryver."Granted.  Thank you.  Well, Mr. Stryver, I was about to say:--itmight be painful to you to find yourself mistaken, it might be painfulto Doctor Manette to have the task of being explicit with you, itmight be very painful to Miss Manette to have the task of beingexplicit with you.  You know the terms upon which I have the honourand happiness to stand with the family.  If you please, committing youin no way, representing you in no way, I will undertake to correct myadvice by the exercise of a little new observation and judgment expresslybrought to bear upon it.  If you should then be dissatisfied with it,you can but test its soundness for yourself; if, on the other hand,you should be satisfied with it, and it should be what it now is,it may spare all sides what is best spared.  What do you say?""How long would you keep me in town?""Oh!  It is only a question of a few hours.  I could go to Soho in theevening, and come to your chambers afterwards.""Then I say yes," said Stryver:  "I won't go up there now, I am notso hot upon it as that comes to; I say yes, and I shall expect youto look in to-night.  Good morning."Then Mr. Stryver turned and burst out of the Bank, causing such aconcussion of air on his passage through, that to stand up against itbowing behind the two counters, required the utmost remaining strengthof the two ancient clerks.  Those venerable and feeble persons werealways seen by the public in the act of bowing, and were popularlybelieved, when they had bowed a customer out, still to keep on bowingin the empty office until they bowed another customer in.The barrister was keen enough to divine that the banker would nothave gone so far in his expression of opinion on any less solidground than moral certainty.  Unprepared as he was for the large pillhe had to swallow, he got it down.  "And now," said Mr. Stryver,shaking his forensic forefinger at the Temple in general, when itwas down, "my way out of this, is, to put you all in the wrong."It was a bit of the art of an Old Bailey tactician, in which hefound great relief.  "You shall not put me in the wrong, young lady,"said Mr. Stryver; "I'll do that for you."Accordingly, when Mr. Lorry called that night as late as ten o'clock,Mr. Stryver, among a quantity of books and papers littered out forthe purpose, seemed to have nothing less on his mind than the subjectof the morning.  He even showed surprise when he saw Mr. Lorry, andwas altogether in an absent and preoccupied state."Well!" said that good-natured emissary, after a full half-hour ofbootless attempts to bring him round to the question.  "I havebeen to Soho.""To Soho?" repeated Mr. Stryver, coldly.  "Oh, to be sure!What am I thinking of!""And I have no doubt," said Mr. Lorry, "that I was right in theconversation we had.  My opinion is confirmed, and I reiterate my advice.""I assure you," returned Mr. Stryver, in the friendliest way, "that Iam sorry for it on your account, and sorry for it on the poor father'saccount.  I know this must always be a sore subject with the family;let us say no more about it.""I don't understand you," said Mr. Lorry."I dare say not," rejoined Stryver, nodding his head in a smoothingand final way; "no matter, no matter.""But it does matter," Mr. Lorry urged."No it doesn't; I assure you it doesn't.  Having supposed that therewas sense where there is no sense, and a laudable ambition where thereis not a laudable ambition, I am well out of my mistake, and no harmis done.  Young women have committed similar follies often before,and have repented them in poverty and obscurity often before.  In anunselfish aspect, I am sorry that the thing is dropped, because itwould have been a bad thing for me in a worldly point of view;in a selfish aspect, I am glad that the thing has dropped, because itwould have been a bad thing for me in a worldly point of view--it is hardly necessary to say I could have gained nothing by it.There is no harm at all done.  I have not proposed to the young lady,and, between ourselves, I am by no means certain, on reflection,that I ever should have committed myself to that extent.  Mr. Lorry,you cannot control the mincing vanities and giddinesses ofempty-headed girls; you must not expect to do it, or you will alwaysbe disappointed.  Now, pray say no more about it.  I tell you,I regret it on account of others, but I am satisfied on my own account.And I am really very much obliged to you for allowing me to sound you,and for giving me your advice; you know the young lady betterthan I do; you were right, it never would have done."Mr. Lorry was so taken aback, that he looked quite stupidly atMr. Stryver shouldering him towards the door, with an appearance ofshowering generosity, forbearance, and goodwill, on his erring head."Make the best of it, my dear sir," said Stryver; "say no moreabout it; thank you again for allowing me to sound you; good night!"Mr. Lorry was out in the night, before he knew where he was.Mr. Stryver was lying back on his sofa, winking at his ceiling.XIIIThe Fellow of No DelicacyIf Sydney Carton ever shone anywhere, he certainly never shone in thehouse of Doctor Manette.  He had been there often, during a whole year,and had always been the same moody and morose lounger there.  When hecared to talk, he talked well; but, the cloud of caring for nothing,which overshadowed him with such a fatal darkness, was very rarelypierced by the light within him.And yet he did care something for the streets that environed that house,and for the senseless stones that made their pavements.  Many a nighthe vaguely and unhappily wandered there, when wine had broughtno transitory gladness to him; many a dreary daybreak revealed hissolitary figure lingering there, and still lingering there when the firstbeams of the sun brought into strong relief, removed beauties ofarchitecture in spires of churches and lofty buildings, as perhapsthe quiet time brought some sense of better things, else forgottenand unattainable, into his mind.  Of late, the neglected bed in theTemple Court had known him more scantily than ever; and often when hehad thrown himself upon it no longer than a few minutes, he had got upagain, and haunted that neighbourhood.On a day in August, when Mr. Stryver (after notifying to his jackalthat "he had thought better of that marrying matter") had carried hisdelicacy into Devonshire, and when the sight and scent of flowers inthe City streets had some waifs of goodness in them for the worst,of health for the sickliest, and of youth for the oldest, Sydney's feetstill trod those stones.  From being irresolute and purposeless,his feet became animated by an intention, and, in the working out ofthat intention, they took him to the Doctor's door.He was shown up-stairs, and found Lucie at her work, alone.  She hadnever been quite at her ease with him, and received him with somelittle embarrassment as he seated himself near her table.  But,looking up at his face in the interchange of the first fewcommon-places, she observed a change in it."I fear you are not well, Mr. Carton!""No.  But the life I lead, Miss Manette, is not conducive to health.What is to be expected of, or by, such profligates?""Is it not--forgive me; I have begun the question on my lips--a pityto live no better life?""God knows it is a shame!""Then why not change it?"Looking gently at him again, she was surprised and saddened to seethat there were tears in his eyes.  There were tears in his voice too,as he answered:"It is too late for that.  I shall never be better than I am.I shall sink lower, and be worse."He leaned an elbow on her table, and covered his eyes with his hand.The table trembled in the silence that followed.She had never seen him softened, and was much distressed.  He knewher to be so, without looking at her, and said:"Pray forgive me, Miss Manette.  I break down before the knowledgeof what I want to say to you.  Will you hear me?""If it will do you any good, Mr. Carton, if it would make you happier,it would make me very glad!""God bless you for your sweet compassion!"He unshaded his face after a little while, and spoke steadily."Don't be afraid to hear me.  Don't shrink from anything I say.I am like one who died young.  All my life might have been.""No, Mr. Carton.  I am sure that the best part of it might still be;I am sure that you might be much, much worthier of yourself.""Say of you, Miss Manette, and although I know better--althoughin the mystery of my own wretched heart I know better--I shallnever forget it!"She was pale and trembling.  He came to her relief with a fixeddespair of himself which made the interview unlike any otherthat could have been holden."If it had been possible, Miss Manette, that you could have returnedthe love of the man you see before yourself--flung away, wasted,drunken, poor creature of misuse as you know him to be--he would havebeen conscious this day and hour, in spite of his happiness, that hewould bring you to misery, bring you to sorrow and repentance, blightyou, disgrace you, pull you down with him.  I know very well that youcan have no tenderness for me; I ask for none; I am even thankfulthat it cannot be.""Without it, can I not save you, Mr. Carton?  Can I not recall you--forgive me again!--to a better course?  Can I in no way repay yourconfidence?  I know this is a confidence," she modestly said, after alittle hesitation, and in earnest tears, "I know you would say this tono one else.  Can I turn it to no good account for yourself, Mr. Carton?"He shook his head."To none.  No, Miss Manette, to none.  If you will hear me through avery little more, all you can ever do for me is done.  I wish you toknow that you have been the last dream of my soul.  In my degradationI have not been so degraded but that the sight of you with your father,and of this home made such a home by you, has stirred old shadows thatI thought had died out of me.  Since I knew you, I have been troubledby a remorse that I thought would never reproach me again, and haveheard whispers from old voices impelling me upward, that I thought weresilent for ever.  I have had unformed ideas of striving afresh, beginninganew, shaking off sloth and sensuality, and fighting out the abandonedfight.  A dream, all a dream, that ends in nothing, and leaves thesleeper where he lay down, but I wish you to know that you inspired it.""Will nothing of it remain?  O Mr. Carton, think again!  Try again!""No, Miss Manette; all through it, I have known myself to be quiteundeserving.  And yet I have had the weakness, and have still theweakness, to wish you to know with what a sudden mastery you kindled me,heap of ashes that I am, into fire--a fire, however, inseparablein its nature from myself, quickening nothing, lighting nothing,doing no service, idly burning away.""Since it is my misfortune, Mr. Carton, to have made you more unhappythan you were before you knew me--""Don't say that, Miss Manette, for you would have reclaimed me,if anything could.  You will not be the cause of my becoming worse.""Since the state of your mind that you describe, is, at all events,attributable to some influence of mine--this is what I mean,if I can make it plain--can I use no influence to serve you?Have I no power for good, with you, at all?""The utmost good that I am capable of now, Miss Manette, I have comehere to realise.  Let me carry through the rest of my misdirected life,the remembrance that I opened my heart to you, last of all the world;and that there was something left in me at this time which you coulddeplore and pity.""Which I entreated you to believe, again and again, most fervently,with all my heart, was capable of better things, Mr. Carton!""Entreat me to believe it no more, Miss Manette.  I have proved myself,and I know better.  I distress you; I draw fast to an end.  Will you letme believe, when I recall this day, that the last confidence of my lifewas reposed in your pure and innocent breast, and that it lies therealone, and will be shared by no one?""If that will be a consolation to you, yes.""Not even by the dearest one ever to be known to you?""Mr. Carton," she answered, after an agitated pause, "the secret isyours, not mine; and I promise to respect it.""Thank you.  And again, God bless you."He put her hand to his lips, and moved towards the door."Be under no apprehension, Miss Manette, of my ever resuming thisconversation by so much as a passing word.  I will never refer to itagain.  If I were dead, that could not be surer than it is henceforth.In the hour of my death, I shall hold sacred the one good remembrance--and shall thank and bless you for it--that my last avowal of myself wasmade to you, and that my name, and faults, and miseries were gentlycarried in your heart.  May it otherwise be light and happy!"He was so unlike what he had ever shown himself to be, and it wasso sad to think how much he had thrown away, and how much he everyday kept down and perverted, that Lucie Manette wept mournfully forhim as he stood looking back at her."Be comforted!" he said, "I am not worth such feeling, Miss Manette.An hour or two hence, and the low companions and low habits that I scornbut yield to, will render me less worth such tears as those, than anywretch who creeps along the streets.  Be comforted!  But, within myself,I shall always be, towards you, what I am now, though outwardly I shallbe what you have heretofore seen me.  The last supplication but oneI make to you, is, that you will believe this of me.""I will, Mr. Carton.""My last supplication of all, is this; and with it, I will relieveyou of a visitor with whom I well know you have nothing in unison,and between whom and you there is an impassable space.  It is uselessto say it, I know, but it rises out of my soul.  For you, and for anydear to you, I would do anything.  If my career were of that betterkind that there was any opportunity or capacity of sacrifice in it,I would embrace any sacrifice for you and for those dear to you.Try to hold me in your mind, at some quiet times, as ardent and sincerein this one thing.  The time will come, the time will not be longin coming, when new ties will be formed about you--ties that will bindyou yet more tenderly and strongly to the home you so adorn--the dearestties that will ever grace and gladden you.  O Miss Manette, when thelittle picture of a happy father's face looks up in yours, when yousee your own bright beauty springing up anew at your feet, thinknow and then that there is a man who would give his life, to keepa life you love beside you!"He said, "Farewell!" said a last "God bless you!" and left her.XIVThe Honest TradesmanTo the eyes of Mr. Jeremiah Cruncher, sitting on his stool inFleet-street with his grisly urchin beside him, a vast number andvariety of objects in movement were every day presented.  Who couldsit upon anything in Fleet-street during the busy hours of the day,and not be dazed and deafened by two immense processions, one evertending westward with the sun, the other ever tending eastwardfrom the sun, both ever tending to the plains beyond the range of redand purple where the sun goes down!With his straw in his mouth, Mr. Cruncher sat watching the two streams,like the heathen rustic who has for several centuries been on dutywatching one stream--saving that Jerry had no expectation of theirever running dry.  Nor would it have been an expectation of a hopefulkind, since a small part of his income was derived from the pilotageof timid women (mostly of a full habit and past the middle term of life)from Tellson's side of the tides to the opposite shore.  Brief as suchcompanionship was in every separate instance, Mr. Cruncher neverfailed to become so interested in the lady as to express a strong desireto have the honour of drinking her very good health.  And it was fromthe gifts bestowed upon him towards the execution of this benevolentpurpose, that he recruited his finances, as just now observed.Time was, when a poet sat upon a stool in a public place, and musedin the sight of men.  Mr. Cruncher, sitting on a stool in a public place,but not being a poet, mused as little as possible, and looked about him.It fell out that he was thus engaged in a season when crowds were few,and belated women few, and when his affairs in general were sounprosperous as to awaken a strong suspicion in his breast thatMrs. Cruncher must have been "flopping" in some pointed manner, whenan unusual concourse pouring down Fleet-street westward, attracted hisattention.  Looking that way, Mr. Cruncher made out that some kind offuneral was coming along, and that there was popular objection to thisfuneral, which engendered uproar."Young Jerry," said Mr. Cruncher, turning to his offspring,"it's a buryin'.""Hooroar, father!" cried Young Jerry.The young gentleman uttered this exultant sound with mysterioussignificance.  The elder gentleman took the cry so ill, that hewatched his opportunity, and smote the young gentleman on the ear."What d'ye mean?  What are you hooroaring at?  What do you want toconwey to your own father, you young Rip?  This boy is a gettingtoo many for _me_!" said Mr. Cruncher, surveying him.  "Him andhis hooroars!  Don't let me hear no more of you, or you shall feelsome more of me.  D'ye hear?""I warn't doing no harm," Young Jerry protested, rubbing his cheek."Drop it then," said Mr. Cruncher; "I won't have none of _your_no harms.  Get a top of that there seat, and look at the crowd."His son obeyed, and the crowd approached; they were bawling and hissinground a dingy hearse and dingy mourning coach, in which mourning coachthere was only one mourner, dressed in the dingy trappings that wereconsidered essential to the dignity of the position.  The positionappeared by no means to please him, however, with an increasing rabblesurrounding the coach, deriding him, making grimaces at him,and incessantly groaning and calling out:  "Yah!  Spies!  Tst!  Yaha!Spies!" with many compliments too numerous and forcible to repeat.Funerals had at all times a remarkable attraction for Mr. Cruncher;he always pricked up his senses, and became excited, when a funeralpassed Tellson's.  Naturally, therefore, a funeral with this uncommonattendance excited him greatly, and he asked of the first man who ranagainst him:"What is it, brother?  What's it about?""_I_ don't know," said the man.  "Spies!  Yaha!  Tst!  Spies!"He asked another man.  "Who is it?""_I_ don't know," returned the man, clapping his hands to his mouthnevertheless, and vociferating in a surprising heat and with thegreatest ardour, "Spies!  Yaha!  Tst, tst!  Spi--ies!"At length, a person better informed on the merits of the case,tumbled against him, and from this person he learned that the funeralwas the funeral of one Roger Cly."Was He a spy?" asked Mr. Cruncher."Old Bailey spy," returned his informant.  "Yaha!  Tst!  Yah!Old Bailey Spi--i--ies!""Why, to be sure!" exclaimed Jerry, recalling the Trial at which hehad assisted.  "I've seen him.  Dead, is he?""Dead as mutton," returned the other, "and can't be too dead.Have 'em out, there!  Spies!  Pull 'em out, there!  Spies!"The idea was so acceptable in the prevalent absence of any idea,that the crowd caught it up with eagerness, and loudly repeating thesuggestion to have 'em out, and to pull 'em out, mobbed the two vehiclesso closely that they came to a stop.  On the crowd's opening the coachdoors, the one mourner scuffled out of himself and was in their handsfor a moment; but he was so alert, and made such good use of his time,that in another moment he was scouring away up a bye-street, aftershedding his cloak, hat, long hatband, white pocket-handkerchief,and other symbolical tears.These, the people tore to pieces and scattered far and wide withgreat enjoyment, while the tradesmen hurriedly shut up their shops;for a crowd in those times stopped at nothing, and was a monstermuch dreaded.  They had already got the length of opening the hearseto take the coffin out, when some brighter genius proposed instead,its being escorted to its destination amidst general rejoicing.Practical suggestions being much needed, this suggestion, too, wasreceived with acclamation, and the coach was immediately filled witheight inside and a dozen out, while as many people got on the roof ofthe hearse as could by any exercise of ingenuity stick upon it.Among the first of these volunteers was Jerry Cruncher himself, whomodestly concealed his spiky head from the observation of Tellson's,in the further corner of the mourning coach.The officiating undertakers made some protest against these changesin the ceremonies; but, the river being alarmingly near, and severalvoices remarking on the efficacy of cold immersion in bringingrefractory members of the profession to reason, the protest was faintand brief.  The remodelled procession started, with a chimney-sweepdriving the hearse--advised by the regular driver, who was perchedbeside him, under close inspection, for the purpose--and with a pieman,also attended by his cabinet minister, driving the mourning coach.A bear-leader, a popular street character of the time, was impressedas an additional ornament, before the cavalcade had gone far downthe Strand; and his bear, who was black and very mangy, gave quitean Undertaking air to that part of the procession in which he walked.Thus, with beer-drinking, pipe-smoking, song-roaring, and infinitecaricaturing of woe, the disorderly procession went its way, recruitingat every step, and all the shops shutting up before it.  Its destinationwas the old church of Saint Pancras, far off in the fields.  It gotthere in course of time; insisted on pouring into the burial-ground;finally, accomplished the interment of the deceased Roger Cly inits own way, and highly to its own satisfaction.The dead man disposed of, and the crowd being under the necessity ofproviding some other entertainment for itself, another brighter genius(or perhaps the same) conceived the humour of impeaching casualpassers-by, as Old Bailey spies, and wreaking vengeance on them.Chase was given to some scores of inoffensive persons who had neverbeen near the Old Bailey in their lives, in the realisation of thisfancy, and they were roughly hustled and maltreated.  The transitionto the sport of window-breaking, and thence to the plundering ofpublic-houses, was easy and natural.  At last, after several hours,when sundry summer-houses had been pulled down, and some area-railingshad been torn up, to arm the more belligerent spirits, a rumour gotabout that the Guards were coming.  Before this rumour, the crowdgradually melted away, and perhaps the Guards came, and perhaps theynever came, and this was the usual progress of a mob.Mr. Cruncher did not assist at the closing sports, but had remainedbehind in the churchyard, to confer and condole with the undertakers.The place had a soothing influence on him.  He procured a pipe from aneighbouring public-house, and smoked it, looking in at the railingsand maturely considering the spot."Jerry," said Mr. Cruncher, apostrophising himself in his usual way,"you see that there Cly that day, and you see with your own eyes thathe was a young 'un and a straight made 'un."Having smoked his pipe out, and ruminated a little longer, he turnedhimself about, that he might appear, before the hour of closing, on hisstation at Tellson's.  Whether his meditations on mortality had touchedhis liver, or whether his general health had been previously at allamiss, or whether he desired to show a little attention to an eminentman, is not so much to the purpose, as that he made a short call uponhis medical adviser--a distinguished surgeon--on his way back.Young Jerry relieved his father with dutiful interest, and reported Nojob in his absence.  The bank closed, the ancient clerks came out, theusual watch was set, and Mr. Cruncher and his son went home to tea."Now, I tell you where it is!" said Mr. Cruncher to his wife, onentering.  "If, as a honest tradesman, my wenturs goes wrong to-night,I shall make sure that you've been praying again me, and I shall workyou for it just the same as if I seen you do it."The dejected Mrs. Cruncher shook her head."Why, you're at it afore my face!" said Mr. Cruncher, with signs ofangry apprehension."I am saying nothing.""Well, then; don't meditate nothing.  You might as well flop asmeditate.  You may as well go again me one way as another.Drop it altogether.""Yes, Jerry.""Yes, Jerry," repeated Mr. Cruncher sitting down to tea.  "Ah!It _is_ yes, Jerry.  That's about it.  You may say yes, Jerry."Mr. Cruncher had no particular meaning in these sulky corroborations,but made use of them, as people not unfrequently do, to expressgeneral ironical dissatisfaction."You and your yes, Jerry," said Mr. Cruncher, taking a bite out of hisbread-and-butter, and seeming to help it down with a large invisibleoyster out of his saucer.  "Ah!  I think so.  I believe you.""You are going out to-night?" asked his decent wife, when he tookanother bite."Yes, I am.""May I go with you, father?" asked his son, briskly."No, you mayn't.  I'm a going--as your mother knows--a fishing.That's where I'm going to.  Going a fishing.""Your fishing-rod gets rayther rusty; don't it, father?""Never you mind.""Shall you bring any fish home, father?""If I don't, you'll have short commons, to-morrow," returned thatgentleman, shaking his head; "that's questions enough for you; Iain't a going out, till you've been long abed."He devoted himself during the remainder of the evening to keepinga most vigilant watch on Mrs. Cruncher, and sullenly holding her inconversation that she might be prevented from meditating any petitionsto his disadvantage.  With this view, he urged his son to hold her inconversation also, and led the unfortunate woman a hard life by dwellingon any causes of complaint he could bring against her, rather than hewould leave her for a moment to her own reflections.  The devoutestperson could have rendered no greater homage to the efficacy of an honestprayer than he did in this distrust of his wife.  It was as if aprofessed unbeliever in ghosts should be frightened by a ghost story."And mind you!" said Mr. Cruncher.  "No games to-morrow!  If I,as a honest tradesman, succeed in providing a jinte of meat or two,none of your not touching of it, and sticking to bread.  If I,as a honest tradesman, am able to provide a little beer, none of yourdeclaring on water.  When you go to Rome, do as Rome does.  Rome willbe a ugly customer to you, if you don't.  _I_'m your Rome, you know."Then he began grumbling again:"With your flying into the face of your own wittles and drink!  I don'tknow how scarce you mayn't make the wittles and drink here, by yourflopping tricks and your unfeeling conduct.  Look at your boy:  he _is_your'n, ain't he?  He's as thin as a lath.  Do you call yourself amother, and not know that a mother's first duty is to blow her boy out?"This touched Young Jerry on a tender place; who adjured his mother toperform her first duty, and, whatever else she did or neglected, aboveall things to lay especial stress on the discharge of that maternalfunction so affectingly and delicately indicated by his other parent.Thus the evening wore away with the Cruncher family, until Young Jerrywas ordered to bed, and his mother, laid under similar injunctions,obeyed them.  Mr. Cruncher beguiled the earlier watches of the nightwith solitary pipes, and did not start upon his excursion until nearlyone o'clock.  Towards that small and ghostly hour, he rose up from hischair, took a key out of his pocket, opened a locked cupboard, andbrought forth a sack, a crowbar of convenient size, a rope and chain,and other fishing tackle of that nature.  Disposing these articles abouthim in skilful manner, he bestowed a parting defiance on Mrs. Cruncher,extinguished the light, and went out.Young Jerry, who had only made a feint of undressing when he went to bed,was not long after his father.  Under cover of the darkness he followedout of the room, followed down the stairs, followed down the court,followed out into the streets.  He was in no uneasiness concerninghis getting into the house again, for it was full of lodgers, and thedoor stood ajar all night.Impelled by a laudable ambition to study the art and mystery of hisfather's honest calling, Young Jerry, keeping as close to house fronts,walls, and doorways, as his eyes were close to one another, held hishonoured parent in view.  The honoured parent steering Northward,had not gone far, when he was joined by another disciple ofIzaak Walton, and the two trudged on together.Within half an hour from the first starting, they were beyond thewinking lamps, and the more than winking watchmen, and were out upona lonely road.  Another fisherman was picked up here--and that sosilently, that if Young Jerry had been superstitious, he might havesupposed the second follower of the gentle craft to have, all of asudden, split himself into two.The three went on, and Young Jerry went on, until the three stoppedunder a bank overhanging the road.  Upon the top of the bank was alow brick wall, surmounted by an iron railing.  In the shadow of bankand wall the three turned out of the road, and up a blind lane, of whichthe wall--there, risen to some eight or ten feet high--formed one side.Crouching down in a corner, peeping up the lane, the next object thatYoung Jerry saw, was the form of his honoured parent, pretty welldefined against a watery and clouded moon, nimbly scaling an irongate.  He was soon over, and then the second fisherman got over, andthen the third.  They all dropped softly on the ground within the gate,and lay there a little--listening perhaps.  Then, they moved away ontheir hands and knees.It was now Young Jerry's turn to approach the gate:  which he did,holding his breath.  Crouching down again in a corner there, and lookingin, he made out the three fishermen creeping through some rank grass!and all the gravestones in the churchyard--it was a large churchyardthat they were in--looking on like ghosts in white, while the churchtower itself looked on like the ghost of a monstrous giant.  They didnot creep far, before they stopped and stood upright.  And then theybegan to fish.They fished with a spade, at first.  Presently the honoured parentappeared to be adjusting some instrument like a great corkscrew.Whatever tools they worked with, they worked hard, until the awfulstriking of the church clock so terrified Young Jerry, that he made off,with his hair as stiff as his father's.But, his long-cherished desire to know more about these matters, notonly stopped him in his running away, but lured him back again.  Theywere still fishing perseveringly, when he peeped in at the gate forthe second time; but, now they seemed to have got a bite.  There was ascrewing and complaining sound down below, and their bent figures werestrained, as if by a weight.  By slow degrees the weight broke away theearth upon it, and came to the surface.  Young Jerry very well knew whatit would be; but, when he saw it, and saw his honoured parent about towrench it open, he was so frightened, being new to the sight, that hemade off again, and never stopped until he had run a mile or more.He would not have stopped then, for anything less necessary thanbreath, it being a spectral sort of race that he ran, and one highlydesirable to get to the end of.  He had a strong idea that the coffinhe had seen was running after him; and, pictured as hopping on behindhim, bolt upright, upon its narrow end, always on the point ofovertaking him and hopping on at his side--perhaps taking his arm--itwas a pursuer to shun.  It was an inconsistent and ubiquitous fiendtoo, for, while it was making the whole night behind him dreadful,he darted out into the roadway to avoid dark alleys, fearful of itscoming hopping out of them like a dropsical boy's-Kite without tailand wings.  It hid in doorways too, rubbing its horrible shouldersagainst doors, and drawing them up to its ears, as if it were laughing.It got into shadows on the road, and lay cunningly on its back totrip him up.  All this time it was incessantly hopping on behind andgaining on him, so that when the boy got to his own door he had reasonfor being half dead.  And even then it would not leave him, but followedhim upstairs with a bump on every stair, scrambled into bed with him,and bumped down, dead and heavy, on his breast when he fell asleep.From his oppressed slumber, Young Jerry in his closet was awakenedafter daybreak and before sunrise, by the presence of his father inthe family room.  Something had gone wrong with him; at least, soYoung Jerry inferred, from the circumstance of his holdingMrs. Cruncher by the ears, and knocking the back of her head againstthe head-board of the bed."I told you I would," said Mr. Cruncher, "and I did.""Jerry, Jerry, Jerry!" his wife implored."You oppose yourself to the profit of the business," said Jerry,"and me and my partners suffer.  You was to honour and obey;why the devil don't you?""I try to be a good wife, Jerry," the poor woman protested, with tears."Is it being a good wife to oppose your husband's business?  Is ithonouring your husband to dishonour his business?  Is it obeying yourhusband to disobey him on the wital subject of his business?""You hadn't taken to the dreadful business then, Jerry.""It's enough for you," retorted Mr. Cruncher, "to be the wife of ahonest tradesman, and not to occupy your female mind with calculationswhen he took to his trade or when he didn't.  A honouring and obeyingwife would let his trade alone altogether.  Call yourself a religiouswoman?  If you're a religious woman, give me a irreligious one!You have no more nat'ral sense of duty than the bed of this here Thamesriver has of a pile, and similarly it must be knocked into you."The altercation was conducted in a low tone of voice, and terminatedin the honest tradesman's kicking off his clay-soiled boots, and lyingdown at his length on the floor.  After taking a timid peep at himlying on his back, with his rusty hands under his head for a pillow,his son lay down too, and fell asleep again.There was no fish for breakfast, and not much of anything else.Mr. Cruncher was out of spirits, and out of temper, and kept an ironpot-lid by him as a projectile for the correction of Mrs. Cruncher,in case he should observe any symptoms of her saying Grace.  He wasbrushed and washed at the usual hour, and set off with his son topursue his ostensible calling.Young Jerry, walking with the stool under his arm at his father'sside along sunny and crowded Fleet-street, was a very differentYoung Jerry from him of the previous night, running home throughdarkness and solitude from his grim pursuer.  His cunning was freshwith the day, and his qualms were gone with the night--in whichparticulars it is not improbable that he had compeers in Fleet-streetand the City of London, that fine morning."Father," said Young Jerry, as they walked along:  taking care tokeep at arm's length and to have the stool well between them:"what's a Resurrection-Man?"Mr. Cruncher came to a stop on the pavement before he answered,"How should I know?""I thought you knowed everything, father," said the artless boy."Hem!  Well," returned Mr. Cruncher, going on again, and lifting offhis hat to give his spikes free play, "he's a tradesman.""What's his goods, father?" asked the brisk Young Jerry."His goods," said Mr. Cruncher, after turning it over in his mind,"is a branch of Scientific goods.""Persons' bodies, ain't it, father?" asked the lively boy."I believe it is something of that sort," said Mr. Cruncher."Oh, father, I should so like to be a Resurrection-Man when I'mquite growed up!"Mr. Cruncher was soothed, but shook his head in a dubious and moralway.  "It depends upon how you dewelop your talents.  Be carefulto dewelop your talents, and never to say no more than you can helpto nobody, and there's no telling at the present time what you maynot come to be fit for."  As Young Jerry, thus encouraged, went ona few yards in advance, to plant the stool in the shadow of the Bar,Mr. Cruncher added to himself:  "Jerry, you honest tradesman, there'shopes wot that boy will yet be a blessing to you, and a recompenseto you for his mother!"XVKnittingThere had been earlier drinking than usual in the wine-shop ofMonsieur Defarge.  As early as six o'clock in the morning, sallowfaces peeping through its barred windows had descried other faces within,bending over measures of wine.  Monsieur Defarge sold a very thin wineat the best of times, but it would seem to have been an unusually thinwine that he sold at this time.  A sour wine, moreover, or a souring,for its influence on the mood of those who drank it was to make themgloomy.  No vivacious Bacchanalian flame leaped out of the pressed grapeof Monsieur Defarge:  but, a smouldering fire that burnt in the dark,lay hidden in the dregs of it.This had been the third morning in succession, on which there had beenearly drinking at the wine-shop of Monsieur Defarge.  It had begunon Monday, and here was Wednesday come.  There had been more of earlybrooding than drinking; for, many men had listened and whispered andslunk about there from the time of the opening of the door, who couldnot have laid a piece of money on the counter to save their souls.These were to the full as interested in the place, however, as ifthey could have commanded whole barrels of wine; and they glided fromseat to seat, and from corner to corner, swallowing talk in lieuof drink, with greedy looks.Notwithstanding an unusual flow of company, the master of the wine-shopwas not visible.  He was not missed; for, nobody who crossed thethreshold looked for him, nobody asked for him, nobody wondered tosee only Madame Defarge in her seat, presiding over the distributionof wine, with a bowl of battered small coins before her, as much defacedand beaten out of their original impress as the small coinage of humanityfrom whose ragged pockets they had come.A suspended interest and a prevalent absence of mind, were perhapsobserved by the spies who looked in at the wine-shop, as they looked inat every place, high and low, from the kings palace to the criminal'sgaol.  Games at cards languished, players at dominoes musingly builttowers with them, drinkers drew figures on the tables with spilt dropsof wine, Madame Defarge herself picked out the pattern on her sleevewith her toothpick, and saw and heard something inaudible and invisiblea long way off.Thus, Saint Antoine in this vinous feature of his, until midday.  Itwas high noontide, when two dusty men passed through his streets andunder his swinging lamps:  of whom, one was Monsieur Defarge:  the othera mender of roads in a blue cap.  All adust and athirst, the two enteredthe wine-shop.  Their arrival had lighted a kind of fire in the breastof Saint Antoine, fast spreading as they came along, which stirred andflickered in flames of faces at most doors and windows.  Yet, no onehad followed them, and no man spoke when they entered the wine-shop,though the eyes of every man there were turned upon them."Good day, gentlemen!" said Monsieur Defarge.It may have been a signal for loosening the general tongue.It elicited an answering chorus of "Good day!""It is bad weather, gentlemen," said Defarge, shaking his head.Upon which, every man looked at his neighbour, and then all cast downtheir eyes and sat silent.  Except one man, who got up and went out."My wife," said Defarge aloud, addressing Madame Defarge:  "I havetravelled certain leagues with this good mender of roads, calledJacques.  I met him--by accident--a day and half's journey out ofParis.  He is a good child, this mender of roads, called Jacques.Give him to drink, my wife!"A second man got up and went out.  Madame Defarge set wine before themender of roads called Jacques, who doffed his blue cap to the company,and drank.  In the breast of his blouse he carried some coarse darkbread; he ate of this between whiles, and sat munching and drinkingnear Madame Defarge's counter.  A third man got up and went out.Defarge refreshed himself with a draught of wine--but, he took lessthan was given to the stranger, as being himself a man to whom it wasno rarity--and stood waiting until the countryman had made his breakfast.He looked at no one present, and no one now looked at him; not evenMadame Defarge, who had taken up her knitting, and was at work."Have you finished your repast, friend?" he asked, in due season."Yes, thank you.""Come, then!  You shall see the apartment that I told you you couldoccupy.  It will suit you to a marvel."Out of the wine-shop into the street, out of the street into acourtyard, out of the courtyard up a steep staircase, out of thestaircase into a garret,--formerly the garret where a white-hairedman sat on a low bench, stooping forward and very busy, making shoes.No white-haired man was there now; but, the three men were therewho had gone out of the wine-shop singly.  And between them and thewhite-haired man afar off, was the one small link, that they had oncelooked in at him through the chinks in the wall.Defarge closed the door carefully, and spoke in a subdued voice:"Jacques One, Jacques Two, Jacques Three!  This is the witnessencountered by appointment, by me, Jacques Four.  He will tell you all.Speak, Jacques Five!"The mender of roads, blue cap in hand, wiped his swarthy forehead withit, and said, "Where shall I commence, monsieur?""Commence," was Monsieur Defarge's not unreasonable reply, "at thecommencement.""I saw him then, messieurs," began the mender of roads, "a year agothis running summer, underneath the carriage of the Marquis, hanging bythe chain.  Behold the manner of it.  I leaving my work on the road,the sun going to bed, the carriage of the Marquis slowly ascendingthe hill, he hanging by the chain--like this."Again the mender of roads went through the whole performance; in whichhe ought to have been perfect by that time, seeing that it had beenthe infallible resource and indispensable entertainment of his villageduring a whole year.Jacques One struck in, and asked if he had ever seen the man before?"Never," answered the mender of roads, recovering his perpendicular.Jacques Three demanded how he afterwards recognised him then?"By his tall figure," said the mender of roads, softly, and with hisfinger at his nose.  "When Monsieur the Marquis demands that evening,'Say, what is he like?' I make response, `Tall as a spectre.'""You should have said, short as a dwarf," returned Jacques Two."But what did I know?  The deed was not then accomplished, neither didhe confide in me.  Observe!  Under those circumstances even, I do notoffer my testimony.  Monsieur the Marquis indicates me with his finger,standing near our little fountain, and says, `To me!  Bring that rascal!'My faith, messieurs, I offer nothing.""He is right there, Jacques," murmured Defarge, to him who hadinterrupted.  "Go on!""Good!" said the mender of roads, with an air of mystery.  "The tallman is lost, and he is sought--how many months?  Nine, ten, eleven?""No matter, the number," said Defarge.  "He is well hidden, but at lasthe is unluckily found.  Go on!""I am again at work upon the hill-side, and the sun is again about togo to bed.  I am collecting my tools to descend to my cottage down inthe village below, where it is already dark, when I raise my eyes,and see coming over the hill six soldiers.  In the midst of themis a tall man with his arms bound--tied to his sides--like this!"With the aid of his indispensable cap, he represented a man with hiselbows bound fast at his hips, with cords that were knotted behind him."I stand aside, messieurs, by my heap of stones, to see the soldiersand their prisoner pass (for it is a solitary road, that, where anyspectacle is well worth looking at), and at first, as they approach,I see no more than that they are six soldiers with a tall man bound,and that they are almost black to my sight--except on the side of thesun going to bed, where they have a red edge, messieurs.  Also, I seethat their long shadows are on the hollow ridge on the opposite sideof the road, and are on the hill above it, and are like the shadows ofgiants.  Also, I see that they are covered with dust, and that the dustmoves with them as they come, tramp, tramp!  But when they advancequite near to me, I recognise the tall man, and he recognises me.Ah, but he would be well content to precipitate himself over thehill-side once again, as on the evening when he and I first encountered,close to the same spot!"He described it as if he were there, and it was evident that he sawit vividly; perhaps he had not seen much in his life."I do not show the soldiers that I recognise the tall man; he doesnot show the soldiers that he recognises me; we do it, and we know it,with our eyes.  `Come on!' says the chief of that company, pointing tothe village, `bring him fast to his tomb!' and they bring him faster.I follow.  His arms are swelled because of being bound so tight, hiswooden shoes are large and clumsy, and he is lame.  Because he is lame,and consequently slow, they drive him with their guns--like this!"He imitated the action of a man's being impelled forward by thebutt-ends of muskets."As they descend the hill like madmen running a race, he falls.They laugh and pick him up again.  His face is bleeding and covered withdust, but he cannot touch it; thereupon they laugh again.  They bringhim into the village; all the village runs to look; they take him pastthe mill, and up to the prison; all the village sees the prison gateopen in the darkness of the night, and swallow him--like this!"He opened his mouth as wide as he could, and shut it with a soundingsnap of his teeth.  Observant of his unwillingness to mar the effectby opening it again, Defarge said, "Go on, Jacques.""All the village," pursued the mender of roads, on tiptoe and in alow voice, "withdraws; all the village whispers by the fountain;all the village sleeps; all the village dreams of that unhappy one,within the locks and bars of the prison on the crag, and never to comeout of it, except to perish.  In the morning, with my tools upon myshoulder, eating my morsel of black bread as I go, I make a circuitby the prison, on my way to my work.  There I see him, high up,behind the bars of a lofty iron cage, bloody and dusty as last night,looking through.  He has no hand free, to wave to me; I dare not callto him; he regards me like a dead man."Defarge and the three glanced darkly at one another.  The looks ofall of them were dark, repressed, and revengeful, as they listened tothe countryman's story; the manner of all of them, while it was secret,was authoritative too.  They had the air of a rough tribunal; JacquesOne and Two sitting on the old pallet-bed, each with his chin restingon his hand, and his eyes intent on the road-mender; Jacques Three,equally intent, on one knee behind them, with his agitated hand alwaysgliding over the network of fine nerves about his mouth and nose;Defarge standing between them and the narrator, whom he had stationedin the light of the window, by turns looking from him to them, andfrom them to him."Go on, Jacques," said Defarge."He remains up there in his iron cage some days.  The village looksat him by stealth, for it is afraid.  But it always looks up, froma distance, at the prison on the crag; and in the evening, when thework of the day is achieved and it assembles to gossip at the fountain,all faces are turned towards the prison.  Formerly, they were turnedtowards the posting-house; now, they are turned towards the prison.They whisper at the fountain, that although condemned to death he willnot be executed; they say that petitions have been presented in Paris,showing that he was enraged and made mad by the death of his child;they say that a petition has been presented to the King himself.What do I know?  It is possible.  Perhaps yes, perhaps no.""Listen then, Jacques," Number One of that name sternly interposed."Know that a petition was presented to the King and Queen.  All here,yourself excepted, saw the King take it, in his carriage in the street,sitting beside the Queen.  It is Defarge whom you see here, who,at the hazard of his life, darted out before the horses, with thepetition in his hand.""And once again listen, Jacques!" said the kneeling Number Three:his fingers ever wandering over and over those fine nerves, with astrikingly greedy air, as if he hungered for something--that wasneither food nor drink; "the guard, horse and foot, surroundedthe petitioner, and struck him blows.  You hear?""I hear, messieurs.""Go on then," said Defarge."Again; on the other hand, they whisper at the fountain," resumed thecountryman, "that he is brought down into our country to be executedon the spot, and that he will very certainly be executed.  They evenwhisper that because he has slain Monseigneur, and because Monseigneurwas the father of his tenants--serfs--what you will--he will beexecuted as a parricide.  One old man says at the fountain, that hisright hand, armed with the knife, will be burnt off before his face;that, into wounds which will be made in his arms, his breast,and his legs, there will be poured boiling oil, melted lead, hot resin,wax, and sulphur; finally, that he will be torn limb from limb by fourstrong horses.  That old man says, all this was actually done to aprisoner who made an attempt on the life of the late King,Louis Fifteen.  But how do I know if he lies?  I am not a scholar.""Listen once again then, Jacques!" said the man with the restless handand the craving air.  "The name of that prisoner was Damiens, and itwas all done in open day, in the open streets of this city of Paris;and nothing was more noticed in the vast concourse that saw it done,than the crowd of ladies of quality and fashion, who were full of eagerattention to the last--to the last, Jacques, prolonged until nightfall,when he had lost two legs and an arm, and still breathed!  And itwas done--why, how old are you?""Thirty-five," said the mender of roads, who looked sixty."It was done when you were more than ten years old; you mighthave seen it.""Enough!" said Defarge, with grim impatience.  "Long live the Devil!Go on.""Well!  Some whisper this, some whisper that; they speak of nothing else;even the fountain appears to fall to that tune.  At length, on Sundaynight when all the village is asleep, come soldiers, winding down fromthe prison, and their guns ring on the stones of the little street.Workmen dig, workmen hammer, soldiers laugh and sing; in the morning,by the fountain, there is raised a gallows forty feet high, poisoningthe water."The mender of roads looked _through_ rather than _at_ the low ceiling,and pointed as if he saw the gallows somewhere in the sky."All work is stopped, all assemble there, nobody leads the cows out,the cows are there with the rest.  At midday, the roll of drums.Soldiers have marched into the prison in the night, and he is in themidst of many soldiers.  He is bound as before, and in his mouth thereis a gag--tied so, with a tight string, making him look almost as if helaughed."  He suggested it, by creasing his face with his two thumbs,from the corners of his mouth to his ears.  "On the top of the gallowsis fixed the knife, blade upwards, with its point in the air.  He ishanged there forty feet high--and is left hanging, poisoning the water."They looked at one another, as he used his blue cap to wipe his face,on which the perspiration had started afresh while he recalled thespectacle."It is frightful, messieurs.  How can the women and the children drawwater!  Who can gossip of an evening, under that shadow!  Under it,have I said?  When I left the village, Monday evening as the sun wasgoing to bed, and looked back from the hill, the shadow struck acrossthe church, across the mill, across the prison--seemed to strike acrossthe earth, messieurs, to where the sky rests upon it!"The hungry man gnawed one of his fingers as he looked at the otherthree, and his finger quivered with the craving that was on him."That's all, messieurs.  I left at sunset (as I had been warned to do),and I walked on, that night and half next day, until I met (as I waswarned I should) this comrade.  With him, I came on, now riding andnow walking, through the rest of yesterday and through last night.And here you see me!"After a gloomy silence, the first Jacques said, "Good!  You haveacted and recounted faithfully.  Will you wait for us a little,outside the door?""Very willingly," said the mender of roads.  Whom Defarge escortedto the top of the stairs, and, leaving seated there, returned.The three had risen, and their heads were together when he cameback to the garret."How say you, Jacques?" demanded Number One.  "To be registered?""To be registered, as doomed to destruction," returned Defarge."Magnificent!" croaked the man with the craving."The chateau, and all the race?" inquired the first."The chateau and all the race," returned Defarge.  "Extermination."The hungry man repeated, in a rapturous croak, "Magnificent!" and begangnawing another finger."Are you sure," asked Jacques Two, of Defarge, "that no embarrassmentcan arise from our manner of keeping the register?  Without doubt itis safe, for no one beyond ourselves can decipher it; but shall wealways be able to decipher it--or, I ought to say, will she?""Jacques," returned Defarge, drawing himself up, "if madame my wifeundertook to keep the register in her memory alone, she would notlose a word of it--not a syllable of it.  Knitted, in her own stitchesand her own symbols, it will always be as plain to her as the sun.Confide in Madame Defarge.  It would be easier for the weakest poltroonthat lives, to erase himself from existence, than to erase one letterof his name or crimes from the knitted register of Madame Defarge."There was a murmur of confidence and approval, and then the man whohungered, asked:  "Is this rustic to be sent back soon?  I hope so.He is very simple; is he not a little dangerous?""He knows nothing," said Defarge; "at least nothing more than wouldeasily elevate himself to a gallows of the same height.  I charge myselfwith him; let him remain with me; I will take care of him, and set himon his road.  He wishes to see the fine world--the King, the Queen, andCourt; let him see them on Sunday.""What?" exclaimed the hungry man, staring.  "Is it a good sign, thathe wishes to see Royalty and Nobility?""Jacques," said Defarge; "judiciously show a cat milk, if you wishher to thirst for it.  Judiciously show a dog his natural prey,if you wish him to bring it down one day."Nothing more was said, and the mender of roads, being found alreadydozing on the topmost stair, was advised to lay himself down on thepallet-bed and take some rest.  He needed no persuasion,and was soon asleep.Worse quarters than Defarge's wine-shop, could easily have been foundin Paris for a provincial slave of that degree.  Saving for a mysteriousdread of madame by which he was constantly haunted, his life was verynew and agreeable.  But, madame sat all day at her counter, so expresslyunconscious of him, and so particularly determined not to perceive thathis being there had any connection with anything below the surface,that he shook in his wooden shoes whenever his eye lighted on her.For, he contended with himself that it was impossible to foresee whatthat lady might pretend next; and he felt assured that if she shouldtake it into her brightly ornamented head to pretend that she had seenhim do a murder and afterwards flay the victim, she would infalliblygo through with it until the play was played out.Therefore, when Sunday came, the mender of roads was not enchanted(though he said he was) to find that madame was to accompany monsieurand himself to Versailles.  It was additionally disconcerting to havemadame knitting all the way there, in a public conveyance; it wasadditionally disconcerting yet, to have madame in the crowd in theafternoon, still with her knitting in her hands as the crowd waitedto see the carriage of the King and Queen."You work hard, madame," said a man near her."Yes," answered Madame Defarge; "I have a good deal to do.""What do you make, madame?""Many things.""For instance--""For instance," returned Madame Defarge, composedly, "shrouds."The man moved a little further away, as soon as he could, and themender of roads fanned himself with his blue cap:  feeling it mightilyclose and oppressive.  If he needed a King and Queen to restore him,he was fortunate in having his remedy at hand; for, soon the large-facedKing and the fair-faced Queen came in their golden coach, attended bythe shining Bull's Eye of their Court, a glittering multitude oflaughing ladies and fine lords; and in jewels and silks and powder andsplendour and elegantly spurning figures and handsomely disdainful facesof both sexes, the mender of roads bathed himself, so much to histemporary intoxication, that he cried Long live the King, Long livethe Queen, Long live everybody and everything! as if he had neverheard of ubiquitous Jacques in his time.  Then, there were gardens,courtyards, terraces, fountains, green banks, more King and Queen,more Bull's Eye, more lords and ladies, more Long live they all! untilhe absolutely wept with sentiment.  During the whole of this scene,which lasted some three hours, he had plenty of shouting and weepingand sentimental company, and throughout Defarge held him by the collar,as if to restrain him from flying at the objects of his brief devotionand tearing them to pieces."Bravo!" said Defarge, clapping him on the back when it was over,like a patron; "you are a good boy!"The mender of roads was now coming to himself, and was mistrustful ofhaving made a mistake in his late demonstrations; but no."You are the fellow we want," said Defarge, in his ear; "you make thesefools believe that it will last for ever.  Then, they are the moreinsolent, and it is the nearer ended.""Hey!" cried the mender of roads, reflectively; "that's true.""These fools know nothing.  While they despise your breath, and wouldstop it for ever and ever, in you or in a hundred like you rather thanin one of their own horses or dogs, they only know what your breathtells them.  Let it deceive them, then, a little longer; it cannotdeceive them too much."Madame Defarge looked superciliously at the client, and nodded inconfirmation."As to you," said she, "you would shout and shed tears for anything,if it made a show and a noise.  Say!  Would you not?""Truly, madame, I think so.  For the moment.""If you were shown a great heap of dolls, and were set upon them topluck them to pieces and despoil them for your own advantage, youwould pick out the richest and gayest.  Say!  Would you not?""Truly yes, madame.""Yes.  And if you were shown a flock of birds, unable to fly, and wereset upon them to strip them of their feathers for your own advantage,you would set upon the birds of the finest feathers; would you not?""It is true, madame.""You have seen both dolls and birds to-day," said Madame Defarge,with a wave of her hand towards the place where they had last beenapparent; "now, go home!"XVIStill KnittingMadame Defarge and monsieur her husband returned amicably to the bosomof Saint Antoine, while a speck in a blue cap toiled through thedarkness, and through the dust, and down the weary miles of avenue bythe wayside, slowly tending towards that point of the compass where thechateau of Monsieur the Marquis, now in his grave, listened to thewhispering trees.  Such ample leisure had the stone faces, now, forlistening to the trees and to the fountain, that the few villagescarecrows who, in their quest for herbs to eat and fragments of deadstick to burn, strayed within sight of the great stone courtyard andterrace staircase, had it borne in upon their starved fancy that theexpression of the faces was altered.  A rumour just lived in thevillage--had a faint and bare existence there, as its people had--thatwhen the knife struck home, the faces changed, from faces of pride tofaces of anger and pain; also, that when that dangling figure washauled up forty feet above the fountain, they changed again, and borea cruel look of being avenged, which they would henceforth bearfor ever.  In the stone face over the great window of the bed-chamberwhere the murder was done, two fine dints were pointed out in thesculptured nose, which everybody recognised, and which nobody hadseen of old; and on the scarce occasions when two or three raggedpeasants emerged from the crowd to take a hurried peep at Monsieurthe Marquis petrified, a skinny finger would not have pointed to itfor a minute, before they all started away among the moss and leaves,like the more fortunate hares who could find a living there.Chateau and hut, stone face and dangling figure, the red stain on thestone floor, and the pure water in the village well--thousands of acresof land--a whole province of France--all France itself--lay under thenight sky, concentrated into a faint hair-breadth line.  So does awhole world, with all its greatnesses and littlenesses, lie in atwinkling star.  And as mere human knowledge can split a ray of lightand analyse the manner of its composition, so, sublimer intelligencesmay read in the feeble shining of this earth of ours, every thoughtand act, every vice and virtue, of every responsible creature on it.The Defarges, husband and wife, came lumbering under the starlight,in their public vehicle, to that gate of Paris whereunto their journeynaturally tended.  There was the usual stoppage at the barrierguardhouse, and the usual lanterns came glancing forth for the usualexamination and inquiry.  Monsieur Defarge alighted; knowing one ortwo of the soldiery there, and one of the police.  The latter he wasintimate with, and affectionately embraced.When Saint Antoine had again enfolded the Defarges in his dusky wings,and they, having finally alighted near the Saint's boundaries, werepicking their way on foot through the black mud and offal of his streets,Madame Defarge spoke to her husband:"Say then, my friend; what did Jacques of the police tell thee?""Very little to-night, but all he knows.  There is another spycommissioned for our quarter.  There may be many more, for all thathe can say, but he knows of one.""Eh well!" said Madame Defarge, raising her eyebrows with a coolbusiness air.  "It is necessary to register him.  How do theycall that man?""He is English.""So much the better.  His name?""Barsad," said Defarge, making it French by pronunciation.  But,he had been so careful to get it accurately, that he then speltit with perfect correctness."Barsad," repeated madame.  "Good.  Christian name?""John.""John Barsad," repeated madame, after murmuring it once to herself."Good.  His appearance; is it known?""Age, about forty years; height, about five feet nine; black hair;complexion dark; generally, rather handsome visage; eyes dark, face thin,long, and sallow; nose aquiline, but not straight, having a peculiarinclination towards the left cheek; expression, therefore, sinister.""Eh my faith.  It is a portrait!" said madame, laughing.  "He shallbe registered to-morrow."They turned into the wine-shop, which was closed (for it was midnight),and where Madame Defarge immediately took her post at her desk,counted the small moneys that had been taken during her absence,examined the stock, went through the entries in the book, made otherentries of her own, checked the serving man in every possible way,and finally dismissed him to bed.  Then she turned out the contentsof the bowl of money for the second time, and began knotting them upin her handkerchief, in a chain of separate knots, for safe keepingthrough the night.  All this while, Defarge, with his pipe in his mouth,walked up and down, complacently admiring, but never interfering;in which condition, indeed, as to the business and his domestic affairs,he walked up and down through life.The night was hot, and the shop, close shut and surrounded by so foula neighbourhood, was ill-smelling.  Monsieur Defarge's olfactorysense was by no means delicate, but the stock of wine smelt muchstronger than it ever tasted, and so did the stock of rum and brandyand aniseed.  He whiffed the compound of scents away, as he put downhis smoked-out pipe."You are fatigued," said madame, raising her glance as she knottedthe money.  "There are only the usual odours.""I am a little tired," her husband acknowledged."You are a little depressed, too," said madame, whose quick eyes hadnever been so intent on the accounts, but they had had a ray or twofor him.  "Oh, the men, the men!""But my dear!" began Defarge."But my dear!" repeated madame, nodding firmly; "but my dear!You are faint of heart to-night, my dear!""Well, then," said Defarge, as if a thought were wrung out of his breast,"it _is_ a long time.""It is a long time," repeated his wife; "and when is it not a long time?Vengeance and retribution require a long time; it is the rule.""It does not take a long time to strike a man with Lightning,"said Defarge."How long," demanded madame, composedly, "does it take to make andstore the lightning?  Tell me."Defarge raised his head thoughtfully, as if there were somethingin that too."It does not take a long time," said madame, "for an earthquake to swallowa town.  Eh well!  Tell me how long it takes to prepare the earthquake?""A long time, I suppose," said Defarge."But when it is ready, it takes place, and grinds to pieces everythingbefore it.  In the meantime, it is always preparing, though it is notseen or heard.  That is your consolation.  Keep it."She tied a knot with flashing eyes, as if it throttled a foe."I tell thee," said madame, extending her right hand, for emphasis,"that although it is a long time on the road, it is on the road andcoming.  I tell thee it never retreats, and never stops.  I tell theeit is always advancing.  Look around and consider the lives of all theworld that we know, consider the faces of all the world that we know,consider the rage and discontent to which the Jacquerie addresses itselfwith more and more of certainty every hour.  Can such things last?Bah!  I mock you.""My brave wife," returned Defarge, standing before her with his heada little bent, and his hands clasped at his back, like a docile andattentive pupil before his catechist, "I do not question all this.But it has lasted a long time, and it is possible--you know well,my wife, it is possible--that it may not come, during our lives.""Eh well!  How then?" demanded madame, tying another knot, as ifthere were another enemy strangled."Well!" said Defarge, with a half complaining and half apologetic shrug."We shall not see the triumph.""We shall have helped it," returned madame, with her extended hand instrong action.  "Nothing that we do, is done in vain.  I believe, withall my soul, that we shall see the triumph.  But even if not, even ifI knew certainly not, show me the neck of an aristocrat and tyrant,and still I would--"Then madame, with her teeth set, tied a very terrible knot indeed."Hold!" cried Defarge, reddening a little as if he felt charged withcowardice; "I too, my dear, will stop at nothing.""Yes!  But it is your weakness that you sometimes need to see yourvictim and your opportunity, to sustain you.  Sustain yourself withoutthat.  When the time comes, let loose a tiger and a devil; but waitfor the time with the tiger and the devil chained--not shown--yetalways ready."Madame enforced the conclusion of this piece of advice by strikingher little counter with her chain of money as if she knocked its brainsout, and then gathering the heavy handkerchief under her arm in aserene manner, and observing that it was time to go to bed.Next noontide saw the admirable woman in her usual place in thewine-shop, knitting away assiduously.  A rose lay beside her, andif she now and then glanced at the flower, it was with no infractionof her usual preoccupied air.  There were a few customers, drinkingor not drinking, standing or seated, sprinkled about.  The day wasvery hot, and heaps of flies, who were extending their inquisitiveand adventurous perquisitions into all the glutinous little glassesnear madame, fell dead at the bottom.  Their decease made no impressionon the other flies out promenading, who looked at them in the coolestmanner (as if they themselves were elephants, or something as farremoved), until they met the same fate.  Curious to consider how heedlessflies are!--perhaps they thought as much at Court that sunny summer day.A figure entering at the door threw a shadow on Madame Defarge whichshe felt to be a new one.  She laid down her knitting, and began topin her rose in her head-dress, before she looked at the figure.It was curious.  The moment Madame Defarge took up the rose, thecustomers ceased talking, and began gradually to drop out of thewine-shop."Good day, madame," said the new-comer."Good day, monsieur."She said it aloud, but added to herself, as she resumed her knitting:"Hah!  Good day, age about forty, height about five feet nine, blackhair, generally rather handsome visage, complexion dark, eyes dark,thin, long and sallow face, aquiline nose but not straight, having apeculiar inclination towards the left cheek which imparts a sinisterexpression!  Good day, one and all!""Have the goodness to give me a little glass of old cognac, and amouthful of cool fresh water, madame."Madame complied with a polite air."Marvellous cognac this, madame!"It was the first time it had ever been so complemented, and MadameDefarge knew enough of its antecedents to know better.  She said,however, that the cognac was flattered, and took up her knitting.The visitor watched her fingers for a few moments, and took theopportunity of observing the place in general."You knit with great skill, madame.""I am accustomed to it.""A pretty pattern too!""_You_ think so?" said madame, looking at him with a smile."Decidedly.  May one ask what it is for?""Pastime," said madame, still looking at him with a smile while herfingers moved nimbly."Not for use?""That depends.  I may find a use for it one day.  If I do--Well,"said madame, drawing a breath and nodding her head with a stern kindof coquetry, "I'll use it!"It was remarkable; but, the taste of Saint Antoine seemed to bedecidedly opposed to a rose on the head-dress of Madame Defarge.Two men had entered separately, and had been about to order drink, when,catching sight of that novelty, they faltered, made a pretence oflooking about as if for some friend who was not there, and went away.Nor, of those who had been there when this visitor entered, was there oneleft.  They had all dropped off.  The spy had kept his eyes open, but hadbeen able to detect no sign.  They had lounged away in a poverty-stricken,purposeless, accidental manner, quite natural and unimpeachable."_John_," thought madame, checking off her work as her fingers knitted,and her eyes looked at the stranger.  "Stay long enough, and I shallknit `BARSAD' before you go.""You have a husband, madame?""I have.""Children?""No children.""Business seems bad?""Business is very bad; the people are so poor.""Ah, the unfortunate, miserable people!  So oppressed, too--as you say.""As _you_ say," madame retorted, correcting him, and deftly knittingan extra something into his name that boded him no good."Pardon me; certainly it was I who said so, but you naturally think so.Of course.""_I_ think?" returned madame, in a high voice.  "I and my husbandhave enough to do to keep this wine-shop open, without thinking.  Allwe think, here, is how to live.  That is the subject _we_ think of,and it gives us, from morning to night, enough to think about, withoutembarrassing our heads concerning others.  _I_ think for others?  No, no."The spy, who was there to pick up any crumbs he could find or make, didnot allow his baffled state to express itself in his sinister face; but,stood with an air of gossiping gallantry, leaning his elbow on MadameDefarge's little counter, and occasionally sipping his cognac."A bad business this, madame, of Gaspard's execution.  Ah! the poorGaspard!"  With a sigh of great compassion."My faith!" returned madame, coolly and lightly, "if people use knivesfor such purposes, they have to pay for it.  He knew beforehand whatthe price of his luxury was; he has paid the price.""I believe," said the spy, dropping his soft voice to a tone thatinvited confidence, and expressing an injured revolutionarysusceptibility in every muscle of his wicked face:  "I believe thereis much compassion and anger in this neighbourhood, touching thepoor fellow?  Between ourselves.""Is there?" asked madame, vacantly."Is there not?""--Here is my husband!" said Madame Defarge.As the keeper of the wine-shop entered at the door, the spy salutedhim by touching his hat, and saying, with an engaging smile, "Goodday, Jacques!"  Defarge stopped short, and stared at him."Good day, Jacques!" the spy repeated; with not quite so muchconfidence, or quite so easy a smile under the stare."You deceive yourself, monsieur," returned the keeper of thewine-shop.  "You mistake me for another.  That is not my name.I am Ernest Defarge.""It is all the same," said the spy, airily, but discomfited too:"good day!""Good day!" answered Defarge, drily."I was saying to madame, with whom I had the pleasure of chatting whenyou entered, that they tell me there is--and no wonder!--much sympathyand anger in Saint Antoine, touching the unhappy fate of poor Gaspard.""No one has told me so," said Defarge, shaking his head.  "I knownothing of it."Having said it, he passed behind the little counter, and stood withhis hand on the back of his wife's chair, looking over that barrierat the person to whom they were both opposed, and whom either of themwould have shot with the greatest satisfaction.The spy, well used to his business, did not change his unconsciousattitude, but drained his little glass of cognac, took a sip of freshwater, and asked for another glass of cognac.  Madame Defarge poured itout for him, took to her knitting again, and hummed a little song over it."You seem to know this quarter well; that is to say, better than I do?"observed Defarge."Not at all, but I hope to know it better.  I am so profoundly interestedin its miserable inhabitants.""Hah!" muttered Defarge."The pleasure of conversing with you, Monsieur Defarge, recalls to me,"pursued the spy, "that I have the honour of cherishing some interestingassociations with your name.""Indeed!" said Defarge, with much indifference."Yes, indeed.  When Doctor Manette was released, you, his old domestic,had the charge of him, I know.  He was delivered to you.  You see I aminformed of the circumstances?""Such is the fact, certainly," said Defarge.  He had had it conveyedto him, in an accidental touch of his wife's elbow as she knitted andwarbled, that he would do best to answer, but always with brevity."It was to you," said the spy, "that his daughter came; and it wasfrom your care that his daughter took him, accompanied by a neat brownmonsieur; how is he called?--in a little wig--Lorry--of the bank ofTellson and Company--over to England.""Such is the fact," repeated Defarge."Very interesting remembrances!" said the spy.  "I have known DoctorManette and his daughter, in England.""Yes?" said Defarge."You don't hear much about them now?" said the spy."No," said Defarge."In effect," madame struck in, looking up from her work and her littlesong, "we never hear about them.  We received the news of their safearrival, and perhaps another letter, or perhaps two; but, since then,they have gradually taken their road in life--we, ours--and we haveheld no correspondence.""Perfectly so, madame," replied the spy.  "She is going to be married.""Going?" echoed madame.  "She was pretty enough to have been marriedlong ago.  You English are cold, it seems to me.""Oh!  You know I am English.""I perceive your tongue is," returned madame; "and what the tongue is,I suppose the man is."He did not take the identification as a compliment; but he made thebest of it, and turned it off with a laugh.  After sipping hiscognac to the end, he added:"Yes, Miss Manette is going to be married.  But not to an Englishman;to one who, like herself, is French by birth.  And speaking of Gaspard(ah, poor Gaspard!  It was cruel, cruel!), it is a curious thing thatshe is going to marry the nephew of Monsieur the Marquis, for whomGaspard was exalted to that height of so many feet; in other words,the present Marquis.  But he lives unknown in England, he is noMarquis there; he is Mr. Charles Darnay.  D'Aulnais is the nameof his mother's family."Madame Defarge knitted steadily, but the intelligence had a palpableeffect upon her husband.  Do what he would, behind the little counter,as to the striking of a light and the lighting of his pipe, he wastroubled, and his hand was not trustworthy.  The spy would have beenno spy if he had failed to see it, or to record it in his mind.Having made, at least, this one hit, whatever it might prove to be worth,and no customers coming in to help him to any other, Mr. Barsad paidfor what he had drunk, and took his leave:  taking occasion to say, in agenteel manner, before he departed, that he looked forward to the pleasureof seeing Monsieur and Madame Defarge again.  For some minutes after hehad emerged into the outer presence of Saint Antoine, the husband andwife remained exactly as he had left them, lest he should come back."Can it be true," said Defarge, in a low voice, looking down at hiswife as he stood smoking with his hand on the back of her chair:  "whathe has said of Ma'amselle Manette?""As he has said it," returned madame, lifting her eyebrows a little,"it is probably false.  But it may be true.""If it is--" Defarge began, and stopped."If it is?" repeated his wife."--And if it does come, while we live to see it triumph--I hope, forher sake, Destiny will keep her husband out of France.""Her husband's destiny," said Madame Defarge, with her usual composure,"will take him where he is to go, and will lead him to the end that isto end him.  That is all I know.""But it is very strange--now, at least, is it not very strange"--saidDefarge, rather pleading with his wife to induce her to admit it,"that, after all our sympathy for Monsieur her father, and herself,her husband's name should be proscribed under your hand at this moment,by the side of that infernal dog's who has just left us?""Stranger things than that will happen when it does come," answeredmadame.  "I have them both here, of a certainty; and they are bothhere for their merits; that is enough."She rolled up her knitting when she had said those words, and presentlytook the rose out of the handkerchief that was wound about her head.Either Saint Antoine had an instinctive sense that the objectionabledecoration was gone, or Saint Antoine was on the watch for itsdisappearance; howbeit, the Saint took courage to lounge in, veryshortly afterwards, and the wine-shop recovered its habitual aspect.In the evening, at which season of all others Saint Antoine turnedhimself inside out, and sat on door-steps and window-ledges, andcame to the corners of vile streets and courts, for a breath of air,Madame Defarge with her work in her hand was accustomed to pass fromplace to place and from group to group:  a Missionary--there weremany like her--such as the world will do well never to breed again.All the women knitted.  They knitted worthless things; but, themechanical work was a mechanical substitute for eating and drinking;the hands moved for the jaws and the digestive apparatus:  if the bonyfingers had been still, the stomachs would have been more famine-pinched.But, as the fingers went, the eyes went, and the thoughts.  And asMadame Defarge moved on from group to group, all three went quickerand fiercer among every little knot of women that she had spoken with,and left behind.Her husband smoked at his door, looking after her with admiration."A great woman," said he, "a strong woman, a grand woman, a frightfullygrand woman!"Darkness closed around, and then came the ringing of church bells andthe distant beating of the military drums in the Palace Courtyard, asthe women sat knitting, knitting.  Darkness encompassed them.  Anotherdarkness was closing in as surely, when the church bells, then ringingpleasantly in many an airy steeple over France, should be melted intothundering cannon; when the military drums should be beating to drowna wretched voice, that night all potent as the voice of Power andPlenty, Freedom and Life.  So much was closing in about the womenwho sat knitting, knitting, that they their very selves were closingin around a structure yet unbuilt, where they were to sit knitting,knitting, counting dropping heads.XVIIOne NightNever did the sun go down with a brighter glory on the quiet cornerin Soho, than one memorable evening when the Doctor and his daughtersat under the plane-tree together.  Never did the moon rise with amilder radiance over great London, than on that night when it foundthem still seated under the tree, and shone upon their facesthrough its leaves.Lucie was to be married to-morrow.  She had reserved this lastevening for her father, and they sat alone under the plane-tree."You are happy, my dear father?""Quite, my child."They had said little, though they had been there a long time.  Whenit was yet light enough to work and read, she had neither engagedherself in her usual work, nor had she read to him.  She had employedherself in both ways, at his side under the tree, many and many a time;but, this time was not quite like any other, and nothing could make it so."And I am very happy to-night, dear father.  I am deeply happy in thelove that Heaven has so blessed--my love for Charles, and Charles'slove for me.  But, if my life were not to be still consecrated to you,or if my marriage were so arranged as that it would part us, even bythe length of a few of these streets, I should be more unhappy andself-reproachful now than I can tell you.  Even as it is--"Even as it was, she could not command her voice.In the sad moonlight, she clasped him by the neck, and laid her faceupon his breast.  In the moonlight which is always sad, as the lightof the sun itself is--as the light called human life is--at itscoming and its going."Dearest dear!  Can you tell me, this last time, that you feel quite,quite sure, no new affections of mine, and no new duties of mine,will ever interpose between us?  _I_ know it well, but do you know it?In your own heart, do you feel quite certain?"Her father answered, with a cheerful firmness of conviction he couldscarcely have assumed, "Quite sure, my darling!  More than that,"he added, as he tenderly kissed her:  "my future is far brighter,Lucie, seen through your marriage, than it could have been--nay,than it ever was--without it.""If I could hope _that_, my father!--""Believe it, love!  Indeed it is so.  Consider how natural and howplain it is, my dear, that it should be so.  You, devoted and young,cannot fully appreciate the anxiety I have felt that your lifeshould not be wasted--"She moved her hand towards his lips, but he took it in his,and repeated the word."--wasted, my child--should not be wasted, struck aside from thenatural order of things--for my sake.  Your unselfishness cannotentirely comprehend how much my mind has gone on this; but, only askyourself, how could my happiness be perfect, while yours was incomplete?""If I had never seen Charles, my father, I should have been quitehappy with you."He smiled at her unconscious admission that she would have been unhappywithout Charles, having seen him; and replied:"My child, you did see him, and it is Charles.  If it had not beenCharles, it would have been another.  Or, if it had been no other,I should have been the cause, and then the dark part of my life wouldhave cast its shadow beyond myself, and would have fallen on you."It was the first time, except at the trial, of her ever hearing him referto the period of his suffering.  It gave her a strange and new sensationwhile his words were in her ears; and she remembered it long afterwards."See!" said the Doctor of Beauvais, raising his hand towards the moon."I have looked at her from my prison-window, when I could not bearher light.  I have looked at her when it has been such torture to meto think of her shining upon what I had lost, that I have beaten myhead against my prison-walls.  I have looked at her, in a state sodun and lethargic, that I have thought of nothing but the number ofhorizontal lines I could draw across her at the full, and the number ofperpendicular lines with which I could intersect them."  He added in hisinward and pondering manner, as he looked at the moon, "It was twentyeither way, I remember, and the twentieth was difficult to squeeze in."The strange thrill with which she heard him go back to that time,deepened as he dwelt upon it; but, there was nothing to shock her inthe manner of his reference.  He only seemed to contrast his presentcheerfulness and felicity with the dire endurance that was over."I have looked at her, speculating thousands of times upon the unbornchild from whom I had been rent.  Whether it was alive.  Whether it hadbeen born alive, or the poor mother's shock had killed it.  Whether itwas a son who would some day avenge his father.  (There was a time in myimprisonment, when my desire for vengeance was unbearable.)  Whether itwas a son who would never know his father's story; who might even liveto weigh the possibility of his father's having disappeared of his ownwill and act.  Whether it was a daughter who would grow to be a woman."She drew closer to him, and kissed his cheek and his hand."I have pictured my daughter, to myself, as perfectly forgetful of me--rather, altogether ignorant of me, and unconscious of me.  I havecast up the years of her age, year after year.  I have seen her marriedto a man who knew nothing of my fate.  I have altogether perished fromthe remembrance of the living, and in the next generation my placewas a blank.""My father!  Even to hear that you had such thoughts of a daughterwho never existed, strikes to my heart as if I had been that child.""You, Lucie?  It is out of the Consolation and restoration you havebrought to me, that these remembrances arise, and pass between us andthe moon on this last night.--What did I say just now?""She knew nothing of you.  She cared nothing for you.""So!  But on other moonlight nights, when the sadness and the silencehave touched me in a different way--have affected me with something aslike a sorrowful sense of peace, as any emotion that had pain for itsfoundations could--I have imagined her as coming to me in my cell, andleading me out into the freedom beyond the fortress.  I have seen herimage in the moonlight often, as I now see you; except that I never heldher in my arms; it stood between the little grated window and the door.But, you understand that that was not the child I am speaking of?""The figure was not; the--the--image; the fancy?""No.  That was another thing.  It stood before my disturbed sense ofsight, but it never moved.  The phantom that my mind pursued, wasanother and more real child.  Of her outward appearance I know no morethan that she was like her mother.  The other had that likeness too--as you have--but was not the same.  Can you follow me, Lucie?Hardly, I think?  I doubt you must have been a solitary prisoner tounderstand these perplexed distinctions."His collected and calm manner could not prevent her blood from runningcold, as he thus tried to anatomise his old condition."In that more peaceful state, I have imagined her, in the moonlight,coming to me and taking me out to show me that the home of her marriedlife was full of her loving remembrance of her lost father.  My picturewas in her room, and I was in her prayers.  Her life was active,cheerful, useful; but my poor history pervaded it all.""I was that child, my father, I was not half so good, but in my lovethat was I.""And she showed me her children," said the Doctor of Beauvais, "andthey had heard of me, and had been taught to pity me.  When theypassed a prison of the State, they kept far from its frowning walls,and looked up at its bars, and spoke in whispers.  She could neverdeliver me; I imagined that she always brought me back after showingme such things.  But then, blessed with the relief of tears,I fell upon my knees, and blessed her.""I am that child, I hope, my father.  O my dear, my dear, will youbless me as fervently to-morrow?""Lucie, I recall these old troubles in the reason that I have to-nightfor loving you better than words can tell, and thanking God for mygreat happiness.  My thoughts, when they were wildest, never rose nearthe happiness that I have known with you, and that we have before us."He embraced her, solemnly commended her to Heaven, and humbly thankedHeaven for having bestowed her on him.  By-and-bye, they wentinto the house.There was no one bidden to the marriage but Mr. Lorry; there was evento be no bridesmaid but the gaunt Miss Pross.  The marriage was tomake no change in their place of residence; they had been able toextend it, by taking to themselves the upper rooms formerly belongingto the apocryphal invisible lodger, and they desired nothing more.Doctor Manette was very cheerful at the little supper.  They wereonly three at table, and Miss Pross made the third.  He regretted thatCharles was not there; was more than half disposed to object to theloving little plot that kept him away; and drank to him affectionately.So, the time came for him to bid Lucie good night, and they separated.But, in the stillness of the third hour of the morning, Lucie camedownstairs again, and stole into his room; not free from unshaped fears,beforehand.All things, however, were in their places; all was quiet; and he layasleep, his white hair picturesque on the untroubled pillow, and hishands lying quiet on the coverlet.  She put her needless candle in theshadow at a distance, crept up to his bed, and put her lips to his;then, leaned over him, and looked at him.Into his handsome face, the bitter waters of captivity had worn; but,he covered up their tracks with a determination so strong, that he heldthe mastery of them even in his sleep.  A more remarkable face in itsquiet, resolute, and guarded struggle with an unseen assailant, wasnot to be beheld in all the wide dominions of sleep, that night.She timidly laid her hand on his dear breast, and put up a prayer thatshe might ever be as true to him as her love aspired to be, and as hissorrows deserved.  Then, she withdrew her hand, and kissed his lipsonce more, and went away.  So, the sunrise came, and the shadows ofthe leaves of the plane-tree moved upon his face, as softly as herlips had moved in praying for him.XVIIINine DaysThe marriage-day was shining brightly, and they were ready outsidethe closed door of the Doctor's room, where he was speaking withCharles Darnay.  They were ready to go to church; the beautiful bride,Mr. Lorry, and Miss Pross--to whom the event, through a gradual processof reconcilement to the inevitable, would have been one of absolutebliss, but for the yet lingering consideration that her brotherSolomon should have been the bridegroom."And so," said Mr. Lorry, who could not sufficiently admire the bride,and who had been moving round her to take in every point of her quiet,pretty dress; "and so it was for this, my sweet Lucie, that I broughtyou across the Channel, such a baby!  Lord bless me!  How little Ithought what I was doing!  How lightly I valued the obligation I wasconferring on my friend Mr. Charles!""You didn't mean it," remarked the matter-of-fact Miss Pross, "andtherefore how could you know it?  Nonsense!""Really?  Well; but don't cry," said the gentle Mr. Lorry."I am not crying," said Miss Pross; "_you_ are.""I, my Pross?" (By this time, Mr. Lorry dared to be pleasant withher, on occasion.)"You were, just now; I saw you do it, and I don't wonder at it.  Sucha present of plate as you have made 'em, is enough to bring tears intoanybody's eyes.  There's not a fork or a spoon in the collection,"said Miss Pross, "that I didn't cry over, last night after the box came,till I couldn't see it.""I am highly gratified," said Mr. Lorry, "though, upon my honour, Ihad no intention of rendering those trifling articles of remembranceinvisible to any one.  Dear me!  This is an occasion that makes a manspeculate on all he has lost.  Dear, dear, dear!  To think that theremight have been a Mrs. Lorry, any time these fifty years almost!""Not at all!"  From Miss Pross."You think there never might have been a Mrs. Lorry?" asked thegentleman of that name."Pooh!" rejoined Miss Pross; "you were a bachelor in your cradle.""Well!" observed Mr. Lorry, beamingly adjusting his little wig,"that seems probable, too.""And you were cut out for a bachelor," pursued Miss Pross, "beforeyou were put in your cradle.""Then, I think," said Mr. Lorry, "that I was very unhandsomely dealtwith, and that I ought to have had a voice in the selection of mypattern.  Enough!  Now, my dear Lucie," drawing his arm soothinglyround her waist, "I hear them moving in the next room, and Miss Prossand I, as two formal folks of business, are anxious not to lose thefinal opportunity of saying something to you that you wish to hear.You leave your good father, my dear, in hands as earnest and asloving as your own; he shall be taken every conceivable care of;during the next fortnight, while you are in Warwickshire and thereabouts,even Tellson's shall go to the wall (comparatively speaking) before him.And when, at the fortnight's end, he comes to join you and your belovedhusband, on your other fortnight's trip in Wales, you shall say thatwe have sent him to you in the best health and in the happiest frame.Now, I hear Somebody's step coming to the door.  Let me kiss my deargirl with an old-fashioned bachelor blessing, before Somebody comesto claim his own."For a moment, he held the fair face from him to look at thewell-remembered expression on the forehead, and then laid the brightgolden hair against his little brown wig, with a genuine tenderness anddelicacy which, if such things be old-fashioned, were as old as Adam.The door of the Doctor's room opened, and he came out with CharlesDarnay.  He was so deadly pale--which had not been the case when theywent in together--that no vestige of colour was to be seen in his face.But, in the composure of his manner he was unaltered, except that tothe shrewd glance of Mr. Lorry it disclosed some shadowy indicationthat the old air of avoidance and dread had lately passed over him,like a cold wind.He gave his arm to his daughter, and took her down-stairs to the chariotwhich Mr. Lorry had hired in honour of the day.  The rest followed inanother carriage, and soon, in a neighbouring church, where no strangeeyes looked on, Charles Darnay and Lucie Manette were happily married.Besides the glancing tears that shone among the smiles of the littlegroup when it was done, some diamonds, very bright and sparkling,glanced on the bride's hand, which were newly released from the darkobscurity of one of Mr. Lorry's pockets.  They returned home tobreakfast, and all went well, and in due course the golden hair thathad mingled with the poor shoemaker's white locks in the Paris garret,were mingled with them again in the morning sunlight, on the thresholdof the door at parting.It was a hard parting, though it was not for long.  But her fathercheered her, and said at last, gently disengaging himself from herenfolding arms, "Take her, Charles!  She is yours!"And her agitated hand waved to them from a chaise window, andshe was gone.The corner being out of the way of the idle and curious, and thepreparations having been very simple and few, the Doctor, Mr. Lorry,and Miss Pross, were left quite alone.  It was when they turned intothe welcome shade of the cool old hall, that Mr. Lorry observed agreat change to have come over the Doctor; as if the golden armuplifted there, had struck him a poisoned blow.He had naturally repressed much, and some revulsion might have beenexpected in him when the occasion for repression was gone.  But, itwas the old scared lost look that troubled Mr. Lorry; and throughhis absent manner of clasping his head and drearily wandering awayinto his own room when they got up-stairs, Mr. Lorry was reminded ofDefarge the wine-shop keeper, and the starlight ride."I think," he whispered to Miss Pross, after anxious consideration,"I think we had best not speak to him just now, or at all disturb him.I must look in at Tellson's; so I will go there at once and come backpresently.  Then, we will take him a ride into the country, and dinethere, and all will be well."It was easier for Mr. Lorry to look in at Tellson's, than to lookout of Tellson's.  He was detained two hours.  When he came back,he ascended the old staircase alone, having asked no question ofthe servant; going thus into the Doctor's rooms, he was stopped bya low sound of knocking."Good God!" he said, with a start.  "What's that?"Miss Pross, with a terrified face, was at his ear.  "O me, O me!All is lost!" cried she, wringing her hands.  "What is to be toldto Ladybird?  He doesn't know me, and is making shoes!"Mr. Lorry said what he could to calm her, and went himself into theDoctor's room.  The bench was turned towards the light, as it hadbeen when he had seen the shoemaker at his work before, and his headwas bent down, and he was very busy."Doctor Manette.  My dear friend, Doctor Manette!"The Doctor looked at him for a moment--half inquiringly, half as ifhe were angry at being spoken to--and bent over his work again.He had laid aside his coat and waistcoat; his shirt was open at thethroat, as it used to be when he did that work; and even the oldhaggard, faded surface of face had come back to him.  He worked hard--impatiently--as if in some sense of having been interrupted.Mr. Lorry glanced at the work in his hand, and observed that it wasa shoe of the old size and shape.  He took up another that was lyingby him, and asked what it was."A young lady's walking shoe," he muttered, without looking up."It ought to have been finished long ago.  Let it be.""But, Doctor Manette.  Look at me!"He obeyed, in the old mechanically submissive manner, withoutpausing in his work."You know me, my dear friend?  Think again.  This is not your properoccupation.  Think, dear friend!"Nothing would induce him to speak more.  He looked up, for an instantat a time, when he was requested to do so; but, no persuasion wouldextract a word from him.  He worked, and worked, and worked, in silence,and words fell on him as they would have fallen on an echoless wall,or on the air.  The only ray of hope that Mr. Lorry could discover,was, that he sometimes furtively looked up without being asked.  In that,there seemed a faint expression of curiosity or perplexity--as thoughhe were trying to reconcile some doubts in his mind.Two things at once impressed themselves on Mr. Lorry, as importantabove all others; the first, that this must be kept secret from Lucie;the second, that it must be kept secret from all who knew him.  Inconjunction with Miss Pross, he took immediate steps towards thelatter precaution, by giving out that the Doctor was not well, andrequired a few days of complete rest.  In aid of the kind deceptionto be practised on his daughter, Miss Pross was to write, describinghis having been called away professionally, and referring to animaginary letter of two or three hurried lines in his own hand,represented to have been addressed to her by the same post.These measures, advisable to be taken in any case, Mr. Lorry took inthe hope of his coming to himself.  If that should happen soon, he keptanother course in reserve; which was, to have a certain opinion that hethought the best, on the Doctor's case.In the hope of his recovery, and of resort to this third course beingthereby rendered practicable, Mr. Lorry resolved to watch himattentively, with as little appearance as possible of doing so.He therefore made arrangements to absent himself from Tellson's for thefirst time in his life, and took his post by the window in the same room.He was not long in discovering that it was worse than useless to speakto him, since, on being pressed, he became worried.  He abandoned thatattempt on the first day, and resolved merely to keep himself alwaysbefore him, as a silent protest against the delusion into which he hadfallen, or was falling.  He remained, therefore, in his seat near thewindow, reading and writing, and expressing in as many pleasant andnatural ways as he could think of, that it was a free place.Doctor Manette took what was given him to eat and drink, and worked on,that first day, until it was too dark to see--worked on, half an hourafter Mr. Lorry could not have seen, for his life, to read or write.When he put his tools aside as useless, until morning, Mr. Lorry roseand said to him:"Will you go out?"He looked down at the floor on either side of him in the old manner,looked up in the old manner, and repeated in the old low voice:"Out?""Yes; for a walk with me.  Why not?"He made no effort to say why not, and said not a word more.  But,Mr. Lorry thought he saw, as he leaned forward on his bench in thedusk, with his elbows on his knees and his head in his hands, that hewas in some misty way asking himself, "Why not?"  The sagacity of theman of business perceived an advantage here, and determined to hold it.Miss Pross and he divided the night into two watches, and observed himat intervals from the adjoining room.  He paced up and down for a longtime before he lay down; but, when he did finally lay himself down,he fell asleep.  In the morning, he was up betimes, and went straightto his bench and to work.On this second day, Mr. Lorry saluted him cheerfully by his name, andspoke to him on topics that had been of late familiar to them.  Hereturned no reply, but it was evident that he heard what was said,and that he thought about it, however confusedly.  This encouragedMr. Lorry to have Miss Pross in with her work, several times during theday; at those times, they quietly spoke of Lucie, and of her father thenpresent, precisely in the usual manner, and as if there were nothingamiss.  This was done without any demonstrative accompaniment, not longenough, or often enough to harass him; and it lightened Mr. Lorry'sfriendly heart to believe that he looked up oftener, and that he appearedto be stirred by some perception of inconsistencies surrounding him.When it fell dark again, Mr. Lorry asked him as before:"Dear Doctor, will you go out?"As before, he repeated, "Out?""Yes; for a walk with me.  Why not?"This time, Mr. Lorry feigned to go out when he could extract no answerfrom him, and, after remaining absent for an hour, returned.  In themeanwhile, the Doctor had removed to the seat in the window, and hadsat there looking down at the plane-tree; but, on Mr. Lorry's return,he slipped away to his bench.The time went very slowly on, and Mr. Lorry's hope darkened, and hisheart grew heavier again, and grew yet heavier and heavier every day.The third day came and went, the fourth, the fifth.  Five days, sixdays, seven days, eight days, nine days.With a hope ever darkening, and with a heart always growing heavierand heavier, Mr. Lorry passed through this anxious time.  The secretwas well kept, and Lucie was unconscious and happy; but he could notfail to observe that the shoemaker, whose hand had been a little outat first, was growing dreadfully skilful, and that he had never beenso intent on his work, and that his hands had never been so nimble andexpert, as in the dusk of the ninth evening.XIXAn OpinionWorn out by anxious watching, Mr. Lorry fell asleep at his post.  Onthe tenth morning of his suspense, he was startled by the shining ofthe sun into the room where a heavy slumber had overtaken him when itwas dark night.He rubbed his eyes and roused himself; but he doubted, when he haddone so, whether he was not still asleep.  For, going to the door ofthe Doctor's room and looking in, he perceived that the shoemaker'sbench and tools were put aside again, and that the Doctor himself satreading at the window.  He was in his usual morning dress, and his face(which Mr. Lorry could distinctly see), though still very pale, wascalmly studious and attentive.Even when he had satisfied himself that he was awake, Mr. Lorry feltgiddily uncertain for some few moments whether the late shoemakingmight not be a disturbed dream of his own; for, did not his eyes showhim his friend before him in his accustomed clothing and aspect, andemployed as usual; and was there any sign within their range, that thechange of which he had so strong an impression had actually happened?It was but the inquiry of his first confusion and astonishment, theanswer being obvious.  If the impression were not produced by a realcorresponding and sufficient cause, how came he, Jarvis Lorry, there?How came he to have fallen asleep, in his clothes, on the sofa inDoctor Manette's consulting-room, and to be debating these pointsoutside the Doctor's bedroom door in the early morning?Within a few minutes, Miss Pross stood whispering at his side.  If hehad had any particle of doubt left, her talk would of necessity haveresolved it; but he was by that time clear-headed, and had none.  Headvised that they should let the time go by until the regularbreakfast-hour, and should then meet the Doctor as if nothing unusualhad occurred.  If he appeared to be in his customary state of mind,Mr. Lorry would then cautiously proceed to seek direction and guidancefrom the opinion he had been, in his anxiety, so anxious to obtain.Miss Pross, submitting herself to his judgment, the scheme was workedout with care.  Having abundance of time for his usual methodicaltoilette, Mr. Lorry presented himself at the breakfast-hour in hisusual white linen, and with his usual neat leg.  The Doctor wassummoned in the usual way, and came to breakfast.So far as it was possible to comprehend him without oversteppingthose delicate and gradual approaches which Mr. Lorry felt to be theonly safe advance, he at first supposed that his daughter's marriagehad taken place yesterday.  An incidental allusion, purposely thrownout, to the day of the week, and the day of the month, set him thinkingand counting, and evidently made him uneasy.  In all other respects,however, he was so composedly himself, that Mr. Lorry determined tohave the aid he sought.  And that aid was his own.Therefore, when the breakfast was done and cleared away, and he andthe Doctor were left together, Mr. Lorry said, feelingly:"My dear Manette, I am anxious to have your opinion, in confidence,on a very curious case in which I am deeply interested; that is to say,it is very curious to me; perhaps, to your better information it maybe less so."Glancing at his hands, which were discoloured by his late work, theDoctor looked troubled, and listened attentively.  He had alreadyglanced at his hands more than once."Doctor Manette," said Mr. Lorry, touching him affectionately on thearm, "the case is the case of a particularly dear friend of mine.Pray give your mind to it, and advise me well for his sake--andabove all, for his daughter's--his daughter's, my dear Manette.""If I understand," said the Doctor, in a subdued tone, "some mentalshock--?""Yes!""Be explicit," said the Doctor.  "Spare no detail."Mr. Lorry saw that they understood one another, and proceeded."My dear Manette, it is the case of an old and a prolonged shock, ofgreat acuteness and severity to the affections, the feelings,the--the--as you express it--the mind.  The mind.  It is the case ofa shock under which the sufferer was borne down, one cannot say forhow long, because I believe he cannot calculate the time himself, andthere are no other means of getting at it.  It is the case of a shockfrom which the sufferer recovered, by a process that he cannot tracehimself--as I once heard him publicly relate in a striking manner.It is the case of a shock from which he has recovered, so completely,as to be a highly intelligent man, capable of close application of mind,and great exertion of body, and of constantly making fresh additions tohis stock of knowledge, which was already very large.  But, unfortunately,there has been," he paused and took a deep breath--"a slight relapse."The Doctor, in a low voice, asked, "Of how long duration?""Nine days and nights.""How did it show itself?  I infer," glancing at his hands again,"in the resumption of some old pursuit connected with the shock?""That is the fact.""Now, did you ever see him," asked the Doctor, distinctly andcollectedly, though in the same low voice, "engaged in thatpursuit originally?""Once.""And when the relapse fell on him, was he in most respects--or inall respects--as he was then?""I think in all respects.""You spoke of his daughter.  Does his daughter know of the relapse?""No.  It has been kept from her, and I hope will always be kept fromher.  It is known only to myself, and to one other who may be trusted."The Doctor grasped his hand, and murmured, "That was very kind.That was very thoughtful!"  Mr. Lorry grasped his hand in return,and neither of the two spoke for a little while."Now, my dear Manette," said Mr. Lorry, at length, in his mostconsiderate and most affectionate way, "I am a mere man of business,and unfit to cope with such intricate and difficult matters.  I donot possess the kind of information necessary; I do not possess thekind of intelligence; I want guiding.  There is no man in this worldon whom I could so rely for right guidance, as on you.  Tell me, howdoes this relapse come about?  Is there danger of another?  Could arepetition of it be prevented?  How should a repetition of it betreated?  How does it come about at all?  What can I do for my friend?No man ever can have been more desirous in his heart to serve a friend,than I am to serve mine, if I knew how."But I don't know how to originate, in such a case.  If your sagacity,knowledge, and experience, could put me on the right track, I might beable to do so much; unenlightened and undirected, I can do so little.Pray discuss it with me; pray enable me to see it a little more clearly,and teach me how to be a little more useful."Doctor Manette sat meditating after these earnest words were spoken,and Mr. Lorry did not press him."I think it probable," said the Doctor, breaking silence with aneffort, "that the relapse you have described, my dear friend, wasnot quite unforeseen by its subject.""Was it dreaded by him?" Mr. Lorry ventured to ask."Very much."  He said it with an involuntary shudder."You have no idea how such an apprehension weighs on the sufferer'smind, and how difficult--how almost impossible--it is, for him to forcehimself to utter a word upon the topic that oppresses him.""Would he," asked Mr. Lorry, "be sensibly relieved if he couldprevail upon himself to impart that secret brooding to any one,when it is on him?""I think so.  But it is, as I have told you, next to impossible.I even believe it--in some cases--to be quite impossible.""Now," said Mr. Lorry, gently laying his hand on the Doctor's armagain, after a short silence on both sides, "to what would you referthis attack?""I believe," returned Doctor Manette, "that there had been a strongand extraordinary revival of the train of thought and remembrance thatwas the first cause of the malady.  Some intense associations of amost distressing nature were vividly recalled, I think.  It is probablethat there had long been a dread lurking in his mind, that thoseassociations would be recalled--say, under certain circumstances--say,on a particular occasion.  He tried to prepare himself in vain; perhapsthe effort to prepare himself made him less able to bear it.""Would he remember what took place in the relapse?" asked Mr. Lorry,with natural hesitation.The Doctor looked desolately round the room, shook his head, andanswered, in a low voice, "Not at all.""Now, as to the future," hinted Mr. Lorry."As to the future," said the Doctor, recovering firmness, "I shouldhave great hope.  As it pleased Heaven in its mercy to restore him sosoon, I should have great hope.  He, yielding under the pressure of acomplicated something, long dreaded and long vaguely foreseen andcontended against, and recovering after the cloud had burst and passed,I should hope that the worst was over.""Well, well!  That's good comfort.  I am thankful!" said Mr. Lorry."I am thankful!" repeated the Doctor, bending his head with reverence."There are two other points," said Mr. Lorry, "on which I am anxiousto be instructed.  I may go on?""You cannot do your friend a better service."  The Doctor gave himhis hand."To the first, then.  He is of a studious habit, and unusuallyenergetic; he applies himself with great ardour to the acquisitionof professional knowledge, to the conducting of experiments, tomany things.  Now, does he do too much?""I think not.  It may be the character of his mind, to be always insingular need of occupation.  That may be, in part, natural to it; inpart, the result of affliction.  The less it was occupied with healthythings, the more it would be in danger of turning in the unhealthydirection.  He may have observed himself, and made the discovery.""You are sure that he is not under too great a strain?""I think I am quite sure of it.""My dear Manette, if he were overworked now--""My dear Lorry, I doubt if that could easily be.  There has been aviolent stress in one direction, and it needs a counterweight.""Excuse me, as a persistent man of business.  Assuming for a moment,that he _was_ overworked; it would show itself in some renewal ofthis disorder?""I do not think so.  I do not think," said Doctor Manette with thefirmness of self-conviction, "that anything but the one train ofassociation would renew it.  I think that, henceforth, nothing butsome extraordinary jarring of that chord could renew it.  After whathas happened, and after his recovery, I find it difficult to imagineany such violent sounding of that string again.  I trust, and I almostbelieve, that the circumstances likely to renew it are exhausted."He spoke with the diffidence of a man who knew how slight a thingwould overset the delicate organisation of the mind, and yet with theconfidence of a man who had slowly won his assurance out of personalendurance and distress.  It was not for his friend to abate thatconfidence.  He professed himself more relieved and encouraged than hereally was, and approached his second and last point.  He felt it tobe the most difficult of all; but, remembering his old Sunday morningconversation with Miss Pross, and remembering what he had seen in thelast nine days, he knew that he must face it."The occupation resumed under the influence of this passing afflictionso happily recovered from," said Mr. Lorry, clearing his throat, "we willcall--Blacksmith's work, Blacksmith's work.  We will say, to put a caseand for the sake of illustration, that he had been used, in his bad time,to work at a little forge.  We will say that he was unexpectedly foundat his forge again.  Is it not a pity that he should keep it by him?"The Doctor shaded his forehead with his hand, and beat his foot nervouslyon the ground."He has always kept it by him," said Mr. Lorry, with an anxious lookat his friend.  "Now, would it not be better that he should let it go?"Still, the Doctor, with shaded forehead, beat his foot nervously onthe ground."You do not find it easy to advise me?" said Mr. Lorry.  "I quiteunderstand it to be a nice question.  And yet I think--" And there heshook his head, and stopped."You see," said Doctor Manette, turning to him after an uneasy pause,"it is very hard to explain, consistently, the innermost workings ofthis poor man's mind.  He once yearned so frightfully for thatoccupation, and it was so welcome when it came; no doubt it relievedhis pain so much, by substituting the perplexity of the fingers forthe perplexity of the brain, and by substituting, as he became morepractised, the ingenuity of the hands, for the ingenuity of themental torture; that he has never been able to bear the thought ofputting it quite out of his reach.  Even now, when I believe he ismore hopeful of himself than he has ever been, and even speaks ofhimself with a kind of confidence, the idea that he might need thatold employment, and not find it, gives him a sudden sense of terror,like that which one may fancy strikes to the heart of a lost child."He looked like his illustration, as he raised his eyes toMr. Lorry's face."But may not--mind!  I ask for information, as a plodding man ofbusiness who only deals with such material objects as guineas,shillings, and bank-notes--may not the retention of the thing involvethe retention of the idea?  If the thing were gone, my dear Manette,might not the fear go with it?  In short, is it not a concession tothe misgiving, to keep the forge?"There was another silence."You see, too," said the Doctor, tremulously, "it is such anold companion.""I would not keep it," said Mr. Lorry, shaking his head; for he gainedin firmness as he saw the Doctor disquieted.  "I would recommend himto sacrifice it.  I only want your authority.  I am sure it does nogood.  Come!  Give me your authority, like a dear good man.  For hisdaughter's sake, my dear Manette!"Very strange to see what a struggle there was within him!"In her name, then, let it be done; I sanction it.  But, I would nottake it away while he was present.  Let it be removed when he is notthere; let him miss his old companion after an absence."Mr. Lorry readily engaged for that, and the conference was ended.They passed the day in the country, and the Doctor was quite restored.On the three following days he remained perfectly well, and on thefourteenth day he went away to join Lucie and her husband.  Theprecaution that had been taken to account for his silence, Mr. Lorryhad previously explained to him, and he had written to Lucie inaccordance with it, and she had no suspicions.On the night of the day on which he left the house, Mr. Lorry wentinto his room with a chopper, saw, chisel, and hammer, attended byMiss Pross carrying a light.  There, with closed doors, and in amysterious and guilty manner, Mr. Lorry hacked the shoemaker's benchto pieces, while Miss Pross held the candle as if she were assistingat a murder--for which, indeed, in her grimness, she was no unsuitablefigure.  The burning of the body (previously reduced to piecesconvenient for the purpose) was commenced without delay in the kitchenfire; and the tools, shoes, and leather, were buried in the garden.So wicked do destruction and secrecy appear to honest minds, thatMr. Lorry and Miss Pross, while engaged in the commission of theirdeed and in the removal of its traces, almost felt, and almost looked,like accomplices in a horrible crime.XXA PleaWhen the newly-married pair came home, the first person who appeared,to offer his congratulations, was Sydney Carton.  They had not beenat home many hours, when he presented himself.  He was not improved inhabits, or in looks, or in manner; but there was a certain rugged air offidelity about him, which was new to the observation of Charles Darnay.He watched his opportunity of taking Darnay aside into a window, andof speaking to him when no one overheard."Mr. Darnay," said Carton, "I wish we might be friends.""We are already friends, I hope.""You are good enough to say so, as a fashion of speech; but, I don'tmean any fashion of speech.  Indeed, when I say I wish we might be friends,I scarcely mean quite that, either."Charles Darnay--as was natural--asked him, in all good-humour andgood-fellowship, what he did mean?"Upon my life," said Carton, smiling, "I find that easier to comprehendin my own mind, than to convey to yours.  However, let me try.  Youremember a certain famous occasion when I was more drunk than--thanusual?""I remember a certain famous occasion when you forced me to confessthat you had been drinking.""I remember it too.  The curse of those occasions is heavy upon me,for I always remember them.  I hope it may be taken into account oneday, when all days are at an end for me!  Don't be alarmed;I am not going to preach.""I am not at all alarmed.  Earnestness in you, is anything butalarming to me.""Ah!" said Carton, with a careless wave of his hand, as if he wavedthat away.  "On the drunken occasion in question (one of a large number,as you know), I was insufferable about liking you, and not liking you.I wish you would forget it.""I forgot it long ago.""Fashion of speech again!  But, Mr. Darnay, oblivion is not so easy tome, as you represent it to be to you.  I have by no means forgotten it,and a light answer does not help me to forget it.""If it was a light answer," returned Darnay, "I beg your forgivenessfor it.  I had no other object than to turn a slight thing, which,to my surprise, seems to trouble you too much, aside.  I declare to you,on the faith of a gentleman, that I have long dismissed it from my mind.Good Heaven, what was there to dismiss!  Have I had nothing moreimportant to remember, in the great service you rendered me that day?""As to the great service," said Carton, "I am bound to avow to you,when you speak of it in that way, that it was mere professionalclaptrap, I don't know that I cared what became of you, when Irendered it.--Mind!  I say when I rendered it; I am speaking of the past.""You make light of the obligation," returned Darnay, "but I will notquarrel with _your_ light answer.""Genuine truth, Mr. Darnay, trust me!  I have gone aside from mypurpose; I was speaking about our being friends.  Now, you know me;you know I am incapable of all the higher and better flights of men.If you doubt it, ask Stryver, and he'll tell you so.""I prefer to form my own opinion, without the aid of his.""Well!  At any rate you know me as a dissolute dog, who has neverdone any good, and never will.""I don't know that you `never will.'""But I do, and you must take my word for it.  Well!  If you couldendure to have such a worthless fellow, and a fellow of such indifferentreputation, coming and going at odd times, I should ask that I might bepermitted to come and go as a privileged person here; that I might beregarded as an useless (and I would add, if it were not for theresemblance I detected between you and me, an unornamental) piece offurniture, tolerated for its old service, and taken no notice of.I doubt if I should abuse the permission.  It is a hundred to oneif I should avail myself of it four times in a year.  It would satisfy me,I dare say, to know that I had it.""Will you try?""That is another way of saying that I am placed on the footing I haveindicated.  I thank you, Darnay.  I may use that freedom with your name?""I think so, Carton, by this time."They shook hands upon it, and Sydney turned away.  Within a minuteafterwards, he was, to all outward appearance, as unsubstantial as ever.When he was gone, and in the course of an evening passed with Miss Pross,the Doctor, and Mr. Lorry, Charles Darnay made some mention of thisconversation in general terms, and spoke of Sydney Carton as a problemof carelessness and recklessness.  He spoke of him, in short, notbitterly or meaning to bear hard upon him, but as anybody might whosaw him as he showed himself.He had no idea that this could dwell in the thoughts of his fair youngwife; but, when he afterwards joined her in their own rooms, he foundher waiting for him with the old pretty lifting of the foreheadstrongly marked."We are thoughtful to-night!" said Darnay, drawing his arm about her."Yes, dearest Charles," with her hands on his breast, and theinquiring and attentive expression fixed upon him; "we are ratherthoughtful to-night, for we have something on our mind to-night.""What is it, my Lucie?""Will you promise not to press one question on me, if I beg younot to ask it?""Will I promise?  What will I not promise to my Love?"What, indeed, with his hand putting aside the golden hair from thecheek, and his other hand against the heart that beat for him!"I think, Charles, poor Mr. Carton deserves more consideration andrespect than you expressed for him to-night.""Indeed, my own?  Why so?""That is what you are not to ask me.  But I think--I know--he does.""If you know it, it is enough.  What would you have me do, my Life?""I would ask you, dearest, to be very generous with him always, andvery lenient on his faults when he is not by.  I would ask you tobelieve that he has a heart he very, very seldom reveals, and that thereare deep wounds in it.  My dear, I have seen it bleeding.""It is a painful reflection to me," said Charles Darnay, quite astounded,"that I should have done him any wrong.  I never thought this of him.""My husband, it is so.  I fear he is not to be reclaimed; there isscarcely a hope that anything in his character or fortunes is reparablenow.  But, I am sure that he is capable of good things, gentle things,even magnanimous things."She looked so beautiful in the purity of her faith in this lost man,that her husband could have looked at her as she was for hours."And, O my dearest Love!" she urged, clinging nearer to him, layingher head upon his breast, and raising her eyes to his, "remember howstrong we are in our happiness, and how weak he is in his misery!"The supplication touched him home.  "I will always remember it, dearHeart!  I will remember it as long as I live."He bent over the golden head, and put the rosy lips to his, and foldedher in his arms.  If one forlorn wanderer then pacing the dark streets,could have heard her innocent disclosure, and could have seen the dropsof pity kissed away by her husband from the soft blue eyes so loving ofthat husband, he might have cried to the night--and the words would nothave parted from his lips for the first time--"God bless her for her sweet compassion!"XXIEchoing FootstepsA wonderful corner for echoes, it has been remarked, that corner wherethe Doctor lived.  Ever busily winding the golden thread which boundher husband, and her father, and herself, and her old directress andcompanion, in a life of quiet bliss, Lucie sat in the still house in thetranquilly resounding corner, listening to the echoing footsteps of years.At first, there were times, though she was a perfectly happy youngwife, when her work would slowly fall from her hands, and her eyeswould be dimmed.  For, there was something coming in the echoes,something light, afar off, and scarcely audible yet, that stirredher heart too much.  Fluttering hopes and doubts--hopes, of a love asyet unknown to her:  doubts, of her remaining upon earth, to enjoy thatnew delight--divided her breast.  Among the echoes then, there wouldarise the sound of footsteps at her own early grave; and thoughts ofthe husband who would be left so desolate, and who would mourn forher so much, swelled to her eyes, and broke like waves.That time passed, and her little Lucie lay on her bosom.  Then,among the advancing echoes, there was the tread of her tiny feet andthe sound of her prattling words.  Let greater echoes resound as theywould, the young mother at the cradle side could always hear thosecoming.  They came, and the shady house was sunny with a child's laugh,and the Divine friend of children, to whom in her trouble she hadconfided hers, seemed to take her child in his arms, as He took thechild of old, and made it a sacred joy to her.Ever busily winding the golden thread that bound them all together,weaving the service of her happy influence through the tissue of alltheir lives, and making it predominate nowhere, Lucie heard in theechoes of years none but friendly and soothing sounds.  Her husband'sstep was strong and prosperous among them; her father's firm and equal.Lo, Miss Pross, in harness of string, awakening the echoes, as anunruly charger, whip-corrected, snorting and pawing the earth underthe plane-tree in the garden!Even when there were sounds of sorrow among the rest, they were notharsh nor cruel.  Even when golden hair, like her own, lay in a haloon a pillow round the worn face of a little boy, and he said, with aradiant smile, "Dear papa and mamma, I am very sorry to leave you both,and to leave my pretty sister; but I am called, and I must go!"those were not tears all of agony that wetted his young mother's cheek,as the spirit departed from her embrace that had been entrusted to it.Suffer them and forbid them not.  They see my Father's face.O Father, blessed words!Thus, the rustling of an Angel's wings got blended with the otherechoes, and they were not wholly of earth, but had in them that breathof Heaven.  Sighs of the winds that blew over a little garden-tomb weremingled with them also, and both were audible to Lucie, in a hushedmurmur--like the breathing of a summer sea asleep upon a sandy shore--as the little Lucie, comically studious at the task of the morning,or dressing a doll at her mother's footstool, chattered in thetongues of the Two Cities that were blended in her life.The Echoes rarely answered to the actual tread of Sydney Carton.Some half-dozen times a year, at most, he claimed his privilege of comingin uninvited, and would sit among them through the evening, as he hadonce done often.  He never came there heated with wine.  And one otherthing regarding him was whispered in the echoes, which has beenwhispered by all true echoes for ages and ages.No man ever really loved a woman, lost her, and knew her with ablameless though an unchanged mind, when she was a wife and a mother,but her children had a strange sympathy with him--an instinctivedelicacy of pity for him.  What fine hidden sensibilities are touchedin such a case, no echoes tell; but it is so, and it was so here.Carton was the first stranger to whom little Lucie held out her chubbyarms, and he kept his place with her as she grew.  The little boy hadspoken of him, almost at the last.  "Poor Carton!  Kiss him for me!"Mr. Stryver shouldered his way through the law, like some great engineforcing itself through turbid water, and dragged his useful friend inhis wake, like a boat towed astern.  As the boat so favoured is usuallyin a rough plight, and mostly under water, so, Sydney had a swamped lifeof it.  But, easy and strong custom, unhappily so much easier andstronger in him than any stimulating sense of desert or disgrace, madeit the life he was to lead; and he no more thought of emerging from hisstate of lion's jackal, than any real jackal may be supposed to thinkof rising to be a lion.  Stryver was rich; had married a florid widowwith property and three boys, who had nothing particularly shining aboutthem but the straight hair of their dumpling heads.These three young gentlemen, Mr. Stryver, exuding patronage of the mostoffensive quality from every pore, had walked before him like threesheep to the quiet corner in Soho, and had offered as pupils to Lucie'shusband:  delicately saying "Halloa! here are three lumps of bread-and-cheese towards your matrimonial picnic, Darnay!"  The polite rejectionof the three lumps of bread-and-cheese had quite bloated Mr. Stryverwith indignation, which he afterwards turned to account in the trainingof the young gentlemen, by directing them to beware of the pride ofBeggars, like that tutor-fellow.  He was also in the habit of declaimingto Mrs. Stryver, over his full-bodied wine, on the arts Mrs. Darnay hadonce put in practice to "catch" him, and on the diamond-cut-diamondarts in himself, madam, which had rendered him "not to be caught."Some of his King's Bench familiars, who were occasionally partiesto the full-bodied wine and the lie, excused him for the latter by sayingthat he had told it so often, that he believed it himself--which issurely such an incorrigible aggravation of an originally bad offence,as to justify any such offender's being carried off to some suitablyretired spot, and there hanged out of the way.These were among the echoes to which Lucie, sometimes pensive,sometimes amused and laughing, listened in the echoing corner, untilher little daughter was six years old.  How near to her heart the echoesof her child's tread came, and those of her own dear father's, alwaysactive and self-possessed, and those of her dear husband's, need notbe told.  Nor, how the lightest echo of their united home, directedby herself with such a wise and elegant thrift that it was moreabundant than any waste, was music to her.  Nor, how there were echoesall about her, sweet in her ears, of the many times her father hadtold her that he found her more devoted to him married (if that could be)than single, and of the many times her husband had said to her that nocares and duties seemed to divide her love for him or her help to him,and asked her "What is the magic secret, my darling, of your beingeverything to all of us, as if there were only one of us,yet never seeming to be hurried, or to have too much to do?"But, there were other echoes, from a distance, that rumbled menacinglyin the corner all through this space of time.  And it was now, aboutlittle Lucie's sixth birthday, that they began to have an awful sound,as of a great storm in France with a dreadful sea rising.On a night in mid-July, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-nine,Mr. Lorry came in late, from Tellson's, and sat himself down by Lucieand her husband in the dark window.  It was a hot, wild night, andthey were all three reminded of the old Sunday night when they hadlooked at the lightning from the same place."I began to think," said Mr. Lorry, pushing his brown wig back, "thatI should have to pass the night at Tellson's.  We have been so full ofbusiness all day, that we have not known what to do first, or whichway to turn.  There is such an uneasiness in Paris, that we haveactually a run of confidence upon us!  Our customers over there, seemnot to be able to confide their property to us fast enough.  There ispositively a mania among some of them for sending it to England.""That has a bad look," said Darnay--"A bad look, you say, my dear Darnay?  Yes, but we don't know whatreason there is in it.  People are so unreasonable!  Some of us atTellson's are getting old, and we really can't be troubled out ofthe ordinary course without due occasion.""Still," said Darnay, "you know how gloomy and threatening the sky is.""I know that, to be sure," assented Mr. Lorry, trying to persuadehimself that his sweet temper was soured, and that he grumbled,"but I am determined to be peevish after my long day's botheration.Where is Manette?""Here he is," said the Doctor, entering the dark room at the moment."I am quite glad you are at home; for these hurries and forebodings bywhich I have been surrounded all day long, have made me nervouswithout reason.  You are not going out, I hope?""No; I am going to play backgammon with you, if you like,"said the Doctor."I don't think I do like, if I may speak my mind.  I am not fit tobe pitted against you to-night.  Is the teaboard still there, Lucie?I can't see.""Of course, it has been kept for you.""Thank ye, my dear.  The precious child is safe in bed?""And sleeping soundly.""That's right; all safe and well!  I don't know why anything shouldbe otherwise than safe and well here, thank God; but I have been soput out all day, and I am not as young as I was!  My tea, my dear!Thank ye.  Now, come and take your place in the circle, and let ussit quiet, and hear the echoes about which you have your theory.""Not a theory; it was a fancy.""A fancy, then, my wise pet," said Mr. Lorry, patting her hand.  "Theyare very numerous and very loud, though, are they not?  Only hear them!"Headlong, mad, and dangerous footsteps to force their way into anybody'slife, footsteps not easily made clean again if once stained red, thefootsteps raging in Saint Antoine afar off, as the little circle satin the dark London window.Saint Antoine had been, that morning, a vast dusky mass of scarecrowsheaving to and fro, with frequent gleams of light above the billowyheads, where steel blades and bayonets shone in the sun.  A tremendousroar arose from the throat of Saint Antoine, and a forest of naked armsstruggled in the air like shrivelled branches of trees in a winter wind:all the fingers convulsively clutching at every weapon or semblance ofa weapon that was thrown up from the depths below, no matter how far off.Who gave them out, whence they last came, where they began, throughwhat agency they crookedly quivered and jerked, scores at a time, overthe heads of the crowd, like a kind of lightning, no eye in the throngcould have told; but, muskets were being distributed--so werecartridges, powder, and ball, bars of iron and wood, knives, axes,pikes, every weapon that distracted ingenuity could discover or devise.People who could lay hold of nothing else, set themselves with bleedinghands to force stones and bricks out of their places in walls.  Everypulse and heart in Saint Antoine was on high-fever strain and athigh-fever heat.  Every living creature there held life as of no account,and was demented with a passionate readiness to sacrifice it.As a whirlpool of boiling waters has a centre point, so, all this ragingcircled round Defarge's wine-shop, and every human drop in the caldronhad a tendency to be sucked towards the vortex where Defarge himself,already begrimed with gunpowder and sweat, issued orders, issued arms,thrust this man back, dragged this man forward, disarmed one to armanother, laboured and strove in the thickest of the uproar."Keep near to me, Jacques Three," cried Defarge; "and do you,Jacques One and Two, separate and put yourselves at the head ofas many of these patriots as you can.  Where is my wife?""Eh, well!  Here you see me!" said madame, composed as ever, but notknitting to-day.  Madame's resolute right hand was occupied with an axe,in place of the usual softer implements, and in her girdle were a pistoland a cruel knife."Where do you go, my wife?""I go," said madame, "with you at present.  You shall see me at thehead of women, by-and-bye.""Come, then!" cried Defarge, in a resounding voice.  "Patriots andfriends, we are ready!  The Bastille!"With a roar that sounded as if all the breath in France had beenshaped into the detested word, the living sea rose, wave on wave,depth on depth, and overflowed the city to that point.  Alarm-bellsringing, drums beating, the sea raging and thundering on its new beach,the attack began.Deep ditches, double drawbridge, massive stone walls, eight greattowers, cannon, muskets, fire and smoke.  Through the fire and throughthe smoke--in the fire and in the smoke, for the sea cast him up againsta cannon, and on the instant he became a cannonier--Defarge of thewine-shop worked like a manful soldier, Two fierce hours.Deep ditch, single drawbridge, massive stone walls, eight great towers,cannon, muskets, fire and smoke.  One drawbridge down!  "Work, comradesall, work!  Work, Jacques One, Jacques Two, Jacques One Thousand,Jacques Two Thousand, Jacques Five-and-Twenty Thousand; in the name ofall the Angels or the Devils--which you prefer--work!"  Thus Defargeof the wine-shop, still at his gun, which had long grown hot."To me, women!" cried madame his wife.  "What!  We can kill as well asthe men when the place is taken!"  And to her, with a shrill thirsty cry,trooping women variously armed, but all armed alike in hunger and revenge.Cannon, muskets, fire and smoke; but, still the deep ditch, the singledrawbridge, the massive stone walls, and the eight great towers.  Slightdisplacements of the raging sea, made by the falling wounded.  Flashingweapons, blazing torches, smoking waggonloads of wet straw, hard workat neighbouring barricades in all directions, shrieks, volleys,execrations, bravery without stint, boom smash and rattle, and thefurious sounding of the living sea; but, still the deep ditch, and thesingle drawbridge, and the massive stone walls, and the eight greattowers, and still Defarge of the wine-shop at his gun, grown doublyhot by the service of Four fierce hours.A white flag from within the fortress, and a parley--this dimlyperceptible through the raging storm, nothing audible in it--suddenlythe sea rose immeasurably wider and higher, and swept Defarge of thewine-shop over the lowered drawbridge, past the massive stone outerwalls, in among the eight great towers surrendered!So resistless was the force of the ocean bearing him on, that evento draw his breath or turn his head was as impracticable as if he hadbeen struggling in the surf at the South Sea, until he was landed inthe outer courtyard of the Bastille.  There, against an angle of awall, he made a struggle to look about him.  Jacques Three was nearlyat his side; Madame Defarge, still heading some of her women, wasvisible in the inner distance, and her knife was in her hand.  Everywherewas tumult, exultation, deafening and maniacal bewilderment, astoundingnoise, yet furious dumb-show."The Prisoners!""The Records!""The secret cells!""The instruments of torture!""The Prisoners!"Of all these cries, and ten thousand incoherences, "The Prisoners!"was the cry most taken up by the sea that rushed in, as if there werean eternity of people, as well as of time and space.  When the foremostbillows rolled past, bearing the prison officers with them, andthreatening them all with instant death if any secret nook remainedundisclosed, Defarge laid his strong hand on the breast of one ofthese men--a man with a grey head, who had a lighted torch in his hand--separated him from the rest, and got him between himself and the wall."Show me the North Tower!" said Defarge.  "Quick!""I will faithfully," replied the man, "if you will come with me.  Butthere is no one there.""What is the meaning of One Hundred and Five, North Tower?"asked Defarge.  "Quick!""The meaning, monsieur?""Does it mean a captive, or a place of captivity?  Or do you mean thatI shall strike you dead?""Kill him!" croaked Jacques Three, who had come close up."Monsieur, it is a cell.""Show it me!""Pass this way, then."Jacques Three, with his usual craving on him, and evidentlydisappointed by the dialogue taking a turn that did not seem to promisebloodshed, held by Defarge's arm as he held by the turnkey's.  Theirthree heads had been close together during this brief discourse, andit had been as much as they could do to hear one another, even then:so tremendous was the noise of the living ocean, in its irruption intothe Fortress, and its inundation of the courts and passages andstaircases.  All around outside, too, it beat the walls with a deep,hoarse roar, from which, occasionally, some partial shouts of tumultbroke and leaped into the air like spray.Through gloomy vaults where the light of day had never shone, pasthideous doors of dark dens and cages, down cavernous flights of steps,and again up steep rugged ascents of stone and brick, more like drywaterfalls than staircases, Defarge, the turnkey, and Jacques Three,linked hand and arm, went with all the speed they could make.  Hereand there, especially at first, the inundation started on them andswept by; but when they had done descending, and were winding andclimbing up a tower, they were alone.  Hemmed in here by the massivethickness of walls and arches, the storm within the fortress and withoutwas only audible to them in a dull, subdued way, as if the noise out ofwhich they had come had almost destroyed their sense of hearing.The turnkey stopped at a low door, put a key in a clashing lock,swung the door slowly open, and said, as they all bent their headsand passed in:"One hundred and five, North Tower!"There was a small, heavily-grated, unglazed window high in the wall,with a stone screen before it, so that the sky could be only seen bystooping low and looking up.  There was a small chimney, heavily barredacross, a few feet within.  There was a heap of old feathery wood-asheson the hearth.  There was a stool, and table, and a straw bed.  Therewere the four blackened walls, and a rusted iron ring in one of them."Pass that torch slowly along these walls, that I may see them,"said Defarge to the turnkey.The man obeyed, and Defarge followed the light closely with his eyes."Stop!--Look here, Jacques!""A. M.!" croaked Jacques Three, as he read greedily."Alexandre Manette," said Defarge in his ear, following the letterswith his swart forefinger, deeply engrained with gunpowder.  "And herehe wrote `a poor physician.'  And it was he, without doubt, who scratcheda calendar on this stone.  What is that in your hand?  A crowbar?Give it me!"He had still the linstock of his gun in his own hand.  He made asudden exchange of the two instruments, and turning on the worm-eatenstool and table, beat them to pieces in a few blows."Hold the light higher!" he said, wrathfully, to the turnkey. "Lookamong those fragments with care, Jacques.  And see!  Here is my knife,"throwing it to him; "rip open that bed, and search the straw. Hold thelight higher, you!"With a menacing look at the turnkey he crawled upon the hearth,and, peering up the chimney, struck and prised at its sides with thecrowbar, and worked at the iron grating across it.  In a few minutes,some mortar and dust came dropping down, which he averted his face toavoid; and in it, and in the old wood-ashes, and in a crevice in thechimney into which his weapon had slipped or wrought itself, he gropedwith a cautious touch."Nothing in the wood, and nothing in the straw, Jacques?""Nothing.""Let us collect them together, in the middle of the cell.  So!Light them, you!"The turnkey fired the little pile, which blazed high and hot.  Stoopingagain to come out at the low-arched door, they left it burning, andretraced their way to the courtyard; seeming to recover their sense ofhearing as they came down, until they were in the raging flood once more.They found it surging and tossing, in quest of Defarge himself.Saint Antoine was clamorous to have its wine-shop keeper foremost inthe guard upon the governor who had defended the Bastille and shot thepeople.  Otherwise, the governor would not be marched to the Hotel deVille for judgment.  Otherwise, the governor would escape, and thepeople's blood (suddenly of some value, after many years ofworthlessness) be unavenged.In the howling universe of passion and contention that seemed toencompass this grim old officer conspicuous in his grey coat and reddecoration, there was but one quite steady figure, and that was awoman's.  "See, there is my husband!" she cried, pointing him out."See Defarge!"  She stood immovable close to the grim old officer,and remained immovable close to him; remained immovable close to himthrough the streets, as Defarge and the rest bore him along; remainedimmovable close to him when he was got near his destination, and beganto be struck at from behind; remained immovable close to him when thelong-gathering rain of stabs and blows fell heavy; was so close to himwhen he dropped dead under it, that, suddenly animated, she put her footupon his neck, and with her cruel knife--long ready--hewed off his head.The hour was come, when Saint Antoine was to execute his horrible ideaof hoisting up men for lamps to show what he could be and do.  SaintAntoine's blood was up, and the blood of tyranny and domination bythe iron hand was down--down on the steps of the Hotel de Ville wherethe governor's body lay--down on the sole of the shoe of Madame Defargewhere she had trodden on the body to steady it for mutilation."Lower the lamp yonder!" cried Saint Antoine, after glaring round for anew means of death; "here is one of his soldiers to be left on guard!"The swinging sentinel was posted, and the sea rushed on.The sea of black and threatening waters, and of destructive upheavingof wave against wave, whose depths were yet unfathomed and whoseforces were yet unknown.  The remorseless sea of turbulently swayingshapes, voices of vengeance, and faces hardened in the furnaces ofsuffering until the touch of pity could make no mark on them.But, in the ocean of faces where every fierce and furious expressionwas in vivid life, there were two groups of faces--each seven in number--so fixedly contrasting with the rest, that never did sea roll whichbore more memorable wrecks with it.  Seven faces of prisoners, suddenlyreleased by the storm that had burst their tomb, were carried highoverhead:  all scared, all lost, all wondering and amazed, as if theLast Day were come, and those who rejoiced around them were lost spirits.Other seven faces there were, carried higher, seven dead faces, whosedrooping eyelids and half-seen eyes awaited the Last Day.  Impassivefaces, yet with a suspended--not an abolished--expression on them; faces,rather, in a fearful pause, as having yet to raise the dropped lids ofthe eyes, and bear witness with the bloodless lips, "THOU DIDST IT!"Seven prisoners released, seven gory heads on pikes, the keys of theaccursed fortress of the eight strong towers, some discovered lettersand other memorials of prisoners of old time, long dead of brokenhearts,--such, and such--like, the loudly echoing footsteps of SaintAntoine escort through the Paris streets in mid-July, one thousand sevenhundred and eighty-nine.  Now, Heaven defeat the fancy of Lucie Darnay,and keep these feet far out of her life!  For, they are headlong, mad,and dangerous; and in the years so long after the breaking of the caskat Defarge's wine-shop door, they are not easily purified when oncestained red.XXIIThe Sea Still RisesHaggard Saint Antoine had had only one exultant week, in which tosoften his modicum of hard and bitter bread to such extent as hecould, with the relish of fraternal embraces and congratulations,when Madame Defarge sat at her counter, as usual, presiding over thecustomers.  Madame Defarge wore no rose in her head, for the greatbrotherhood of Spies had become, even in one short week, extremelychary of trusting themselves to the saint's mercies.  The lamps acrosshis streets had a portentously elastic swing with them.Madame Defarge, with her arms folded, sat in the morning light and heat,contemplating the wine-shop and the street.  In both, there were severalknots of loungers, squalid and miserable, but now with a manifest senseof power enthroned on their distress.  The raggedest nightcap, awry onthe wretchedest head, had this crooked significance in it:  "I know howhard it has grown for me, the wearer of this, to support life in myself;but do you know how easy it has grown for me, the wearer of this, todestroy life in you?"  Every lean bare arm, that had been without workbefore, had this work always ready for it now, that it could strike.The fingers of the knitting women were vicious, with the experience thatthey could tear.  There was a change in the appearance of Saint Antoine;the image had been hammering into this for hundreds of years, and thelast finishing blows had told mightily on the expression.Madame Defarge sat observing it, with such suppressed approval as wasto be desired in the leader of the Saint Antoine women.  One of hersisterhood knitted beside her.  The short, rather plump wife of astarved grocer, and the mother of two children withal, this lieutenanthad already earned the complimentary name of The Vengeance."Hark!" said The Vengeance.  "Listen, then!  Who comes?"As if a train of powder laid from the outermost bound of Saint AntoineQuarter to the wine-shop door, had been suddenly fired, a fast-spreadingmurmur came rushing along."It is Defarge," said madame.  "Silence, patriots!"Defarge came in breathless, pulled off a red cap he wore, and lookedaround him!  "Listen, everywhere!" said madame again.  "Listen to him!"Defarge stood, panting, against a background of eager eyes and openmouths, formed outside the door; all those within the wine-shop hadsprung to their feet."Say then, my husband.  What is it?""News from the other world!""How, then?" cried madame, contemptuously.  "The other world?""Does everybody here recall old Foulon, who told the famished peoplethat they might eat grass, and who died, and went to Hell?""Everybody!" from all throats."The news is of him.  He is among us!""Among us!" from the universal throat again.  "And dead?""Not dead!  He feared us so much--and with reason--that he causedhimself to be represented as dead, and had a grand mock-funeral.  Butthey have found him alive, hiding in the country, and have brought himin.  I have seen him but now, on his way to the Hotel de Ville, aprisoner.  I have said that he had reason to fear us.  Say all!_Had_ he reason?"Wretched old sinner of more than threescore years and ten, if he hadnever known it yet, he would have known it in his heart of hearts ifhe could have heard the answering cry.A moment of profound silence followed.  Defarge and his wife lookedsteadfastly at one another.  The Vengeance stooped, and the jar ofa drum was heard as she moved it at her feet behind the counter."Patriots!" said Defarge, in a determined voice, "are we ready?"Instantly Madame Defarge's knife was in her girdle; the drum was beatingin the streets, as if it and a drummer had flown together by magic; andThe Vengeance, uttering terrific shrieks, and flinging her arms abouther head like all the forty Furies at once, was tearing from house tohouse, rousing the women.The men were terrible, in the bloody-minded anger with which they lookedfrom windows, caught up what arms they had, and came pouring down intothe streets; but, the women were a sight to chill the boldest.  Fromsuch household occupations as their bare poverty yielded, from theirchildren, from their aged and their sick crouching on the bare groundfamished and naked, they ran out with streaming hair, urging oneanother, and themselves, to madness with the wildest cries and actions.Villain Foulon taken, my sister!  Old Foulon taken, my mother!Miscreant Foulon taken, my daughter!  Then, a score of others ran intothe midst of these, beating their breasts, tearing their hair, andscreaming, Foulon alive!  Foulon who told the starving people theymight eat grass!  Foulon who told my old father that he might eatgrass, when I had no bread to give him!  Foulon who told my baby itmight suck grass, when these breasts where dry with want!  O motherof God, this Foulon!  O Heaven our suffering!  Hear me, my dead babyand my withered father:  I swear on my knees, on these stones, to avengeyou on Foulon!  Husbands, and brothers, and young men, Give us the bloodof Foulon, Give us the head of Foulon, Give us the heart of Foulon,Give us the body and soul of Foulon, Rend Foulon to pieces, and dighim into the ground, that grass may grow from him!  With these cries,numbers of the women, lashed into blind frenzy, whirled about, strikingand tearing at their own friends until they dropped into a passionateswoon, and were only saved by the men belonging to them from beingtrampled under foot.Nevertheless, not a moment was lost; not a moment!  This Foulon wasat the Hotel de Ville, and might be loosed.  Never, if Saint Antoineknew his own sufferings, insults, and wrongs!  Armed men and womenflocked out of the Quarter so fast, and drew even these last dregsafter them with such a force of suction, that within a quarter of anhour there was not a human creature in Saint Antoine's bosom but afew old crones and the wailing children.No.  They were all by that time choking the Hall of Examination wherethis old man, ugly and wicked, was, and overflowing into the adjacentopen space and streets.  The Defarges, husband and wife, The Vengeance,and Jacques Three, were in the first press, and at no great distancefrom him in the Hall."See!" cried madame, pointing with her knife.  "See the old villainbound with ropes.  That was well done to tie a bunch of grass uponhis back.  Ha, ha!  That was well done.  Let him eat it now!"  Madameput her knife under her arm, and clapped her hands as at a play.The people immediately behind Madame Defarge, explaining the cause ofher satisfaction to those behind them, and those again explainingto others, and those to others, the neighbouring streets resounded withthe clapping of hands.  Similarly, during two or three hours of drawl,and the winnowing of many bushels of words, Madame Defarge's frequentexpressions of impatience were taken up, with marvellous quickness,at a distance:  the more readily, because certain men who had by somewonderful exercise of agility climbed up the external architecture tolook in from the windows, knew Madame Defarge well, and acted as atelegraph between her and the crowd outside the building.At length the sun rose so high that it struck a kindly ray as of hopeor protection, directly down upon the old prisoner's head.  The favourwas too much to bear; in an instant the barrier of dust and chaff thathad stood surprisingly long, went to the winds, and Saint Antoine hadgot him!It was known directly, to the furthest confines of the crowd.  Defargehad but sprung over a railing and a table, and folded the miserablewretch in a deadly embrace--Madame Defarge had but followed and turnedher hand in one of the ropes with which he was tied--The Vengeanceand Jacques Three were not yet up with them, and the men at the windowshad not yet swooped into the Hall, like birds of prey from their highperches--when the cry seemed to go up, all over the city, "Bring himout!  Bring him to the lamp!"Down, and up, and head foremost on the steps of the building; now, onhis knees; now, on his feet; now, on his back; dragged, and struck at,and stifled by the bunches of grass and straw that were thrust into hisface by hundreds of hands; torn, bruised, panting, bleeding, yet alwaysentreating and beseeching for mercy; now full of vehement agony ofaction, with a small clear space about him as the people drew oneanother back that they might see; now, a log of dead wood drawn througha forest of legs; he was hauled to the nearest street corner where oneof the fatal lamps swung, and there Madame Defarge let him go--as acat might have done to a mouse--and silently and composedly lookedat him while they made ready, and while he besought her:  the womenpassionately screeching at him all the time, and the men sternlycalling out to have him killed with grass in his mouth.  Once, he wentaloft, and the rope broke, and they caught him shrieking; twice, he wentaloft, and the rope broke, and they caught him shrieking; then, the ropewas merciful, and held him, and his head was soon upon a pike, withgrass enough in the mouth for all Saint Antoine to dance at the sight of.Nor was this the end of the day's bad work, for Saint Antoine soshouted and danced his angry blood up, that it boiled again, onhearing when the day closed in that the son-in-law of the despatched,another of the people's enemies and insulters, was coming into Parisunder a guard five hundred strong, in cavalry alone.  Saint Antoinewrote his crimes on flaring sheets of paper, seized him--would havetorn him out of the breast of an army to bear Foulon company--sethis head and heart on pikes, and carried the three spoils of the day,in Wolf-procession through the streets.Not before dark night did the men and women come back to the children,wailing and breadless.  Then, the miserable bakers' shops were besetby long files of them, patiently waiting to buy bad bread; and whilethey waited with stomachs faint and empty, they beguiled the time byembracing one another on the triumphs of the day, and achieving themagain in gossip.  Gradually, these strings of ragged people shortenedand frayed away; and then poor lights began to shine in high windows,and slender fires were made in the streets, at which neighbours cookedin common, afterwards supping at their doors.Scanty and insufficient suppers those, and innocent of meat, as ofmost other sauce to wretched bread.  Yet, human fellowship infusedsome nourishment into the flinty viands, and struck some sparks ofcheerfulness out of them.  Fathers and mothers who had had their fullshare in the worst of the day, played gently with their meagrechildren; and lovers, with such a world around them and before them,loved and hoped.It was almost morning, when Defarge's wine-shop parted with its lastknot of customers, and Monsieur Defarge said to madame his wife, inhusky tones, while fastening the door:"At last it is come, my dear!""Eh well!" returned madame.  "Almost."Saint Antoine slept, the Defarges slept:  even The Vengeance slept withher starved grocer, and the drum was at rest.  The drum's was the onlyvoice in Saint Antoine that blood and hurry had not changed.  TheVengeance, as custodian of the drum, could have wakened him up and hadthe same speech out of him as before the Bastille fell, or old Foulonwas seized; not so with the hoarse tones of the men and women in SaintAntoine's bosom.XXIIIFire RisesThere was a change on the village where the fountain fell, and wherethe mender of roads went forth daily to hammer out of the stones onthe highway such morsels of bread as might serve for patches to holdhis poor ignorant soul and his poor reduced body together.  The prisonon the crag was not so dominant as of yore; there were soldiers to guardit, but not many; there were officers to guard the soldiers, but notone of them knew what his men would do--beyond this:  that it wouldprobably not be what he was ordered.Far and wide lay a ruined country, yielding nothing but desolation.Every green leaf, every blade of grass and blade of grain, was asshrivelled and poor as the miserable people.  Everything was boweddown, dejected, oppressed, and broken.  Habitations, fences,domesticated animals, men, women, children, and the soil that borethem--all worn out.Monseigneur (often a most worthy individual gentleman) was a nationalblessing, gave a chivalrous tone to things, was a polite example ofluxurious and shining fife, and a great deal more to equal purpose;nevertheless, Monseigneur as a class had, somehow or other, broughtthings to this.  Strange that Creation, designed expressly forMonseigneur, should be so soon wrung dry and squeezed out!  There mustbe something short-sighted in the eternal arrangements, surely!  Thusit was, however; and the last drop of blood having been extracted fromthe flints, and the last screw of the rack having been turned so oftenthat its purchase crumbled, and it now turned and turned with nothingto bite, Monseigneur began to run away from a phenomenon so lowand unaccountable.But, this was not the change on the village, and on many a villagelike it.  For scores of years gone by, Monseigneur had squeezed itand wrung it, and had seldom graced it with his presence except forthe pleasures of the chase--now, found in hunting the people; now,found in hunting the beasts, for whose preservation Monseigneur madeedifying spaces of barbarous and barren wilderness.  No.  The changeconsisted in the appearance of strange faces of low caste, rather thanin the disappearance of the high caste, chiselled, and otherwisebeautified and beautifying features of Monseigneur.For, in these times, as the mender of roads worked, solitary, in thedust, not often troubling himself to reflect that dust he was and todust he must return, being for the most part too much occupied inthinking how little he had for supper and how much more he would eatif he had it--in these times, as he raised his eyes from his lonelylabour, and viewed the prospect, he would see some rough figureapproaching on foot, the like of which was once a rarity in thoseparts, but was now a frequent presence.  As it advanced, the menderof roads would discern without surprise, that it was a shaggy-hairedman, of almost barbarian aspect, tall, in wooden shoes that wereclumsy even to the eyes of a mender of roads, grim, rough, swart,steeped in the mud and dust of many highways, dank with the marshymoisture of many low grounds, sprinkled with the thorns and leavesand moss of many byways through woods.Such a man came upon him, like a ghost, at noon in the July weather,as he sat on his heap of stones under a bank, taking such shelter ashe could get from a shower of hail.The man looked at him, looked at the village in the hollow, at themill, and at the prison on the crag.  When he had identified theseobjects in what benighted mind he had, he said, in a dialect thatwas just intelligible:"How goes it, Jacques?""All well, Jacques.""Touch then!"They joined hands, and the man sat down on the heap of stones."No dinner?""Nothing but supper now," said the mender of roads, with a hungry face."It is the fashion," growled the man.  "I meet no dinner anywhere."He took out a blackened pipe, filled it, lighted it with flint andsteel, pulled at it until it was in a bright glow:  then, suddenly heldit from him and dropped something into it from between his finger andthumb, that blazed and went out in a puff of smoke."Touch then."  It was the turn of the mender of roads to say it thistime, after observing these operations.  They again joined hands."To-night?" said the mender of roads."To-night," said the man, putting the pipe in his mouth."Where?""Here."He and the mender of roads sat on the heap of stones looking silentlyat one another, with the hail driving in between them like a pigmycharge of bayonets, until the sky began to clear over the village."Show me!" said the traveller then, moving to the brow of the hill."See!" returned the mender of roads, with extended finger.  "You godown here, and straight through the street, and past the fountain--""To the Devil with all that!" interrupted the other, rolling his eyeover the landscape.  "_I_ go through no streets and past no fountains.Well?""Well!  About two leagues beyond the summit of that hill abovethe village.""Good.  When do you cease to work?""At sunset.""Will you wake me, before departing?  I have walked two nights withoutresting.  Let me finish my pipe, and I shall sleep like a child.  Willyou wake me?""Surely."The wayfarer smoked his pipe out, put it in his breast, slipped offhis great wooden shoes, and lay down on his back on the heap of stones.He was fast asleep directly.As the road-mender plied his dusty labour, and the hail-clouds, rollingaway, revealed bright bars and streaks of sky which were responded toby silver gleams upon the landscape, the little man (who wore a red capnow, in place of his blue one) seemed fascinated by the figure on theheap of stones.  His eyes were so often turned towards it, that heused his tools mechanically, and, one would have said, to very pooraccount.  The bronze face, the shaggy black hair and beard, the coarsewoollen red cap, the rough medley dress of home-spun stuff and hairyskins of beasts, the powerful frame attenuated by spare living, andthe sullen and desperate compression of the lips in sleep, inspiredthe mender of roads with awe.  The traveller had travelled far, andhis feet were footsore, and his ankles chafed and bleeding; his greatshoes, stuffed with leaves and grass, had been heavy to drag over themany long leagues, and his clothes were chafed into holes, as he himselfwas into sores.  Stooping down beside him, the road-mender tried toget a peep at secret weapons in his breast or where not; but, in vain,for he slept with his arms crossed upon him, and set as resolutely ashis lips.  Fortified towns with their stockades, guard-houses, gates,trenches, and drawbridges, seemed to the mender of roads, to be so muchair as against this figure.  And when he lifted his eyes from it tothe horizon and looked around, he saw in his small fancy similar figures,stopped by no obstacle, tending to centres all over France.The man slept on, indifferent to showers of hail and intervals ofbrightness, to sunshine on his face and shadow, to the paltering lumpsof dull ice on his body and the diamonds into which the sun changedthem, until the sun was low in the west, and the sky was glowing.Then, the mender of roads having got his tools together and all thingsready to go down into the village, roused him."Good!" said the sleeper, rising on his elbow.  "Two leagues beyondthe summit of the hill?""About.""About.  Good!"The mender of roads went home, with the dust going on before himaccording to the set of the wind, and was soon at the fountain,squeezing himself in among the lean kine brought there to drink, andappearing even to whisper to them in his whispering to all the village.When the village had taken its poor supper, it did not creep to bed,as it usually did, but came out of doors again, and remained there.A curious contagion of whispering was upon it, and also, when itgathered together at the fountain in the dark, another curious contagionof looking expectantly at the sky in one direction only.  MonsieurGabelle, chief functionary of the place, became uneasy; went out onhis house-top alone, and looked in that direction too; glanced downfrom behind his chimneys at the darkening faces by the fountain below,and sent word to the sacristan who kept the keys of the church, thatthere might be need to ring the tocsin by-and-bye.The night deepened.  The trees environing the old chateau, keepingits solitary state apart, moved in a rising wind, as though theythreatened the pile of building massive and dark in the gloom.  Upthe two terrace flights of steps the rain ran wildly, and beat atthe great door, like a swift messenger rousing those within; uneasyrushes of wind went through the hall, among the old spears and knives,and passed lamenting up the stairs, and shook the curtains of the bedwhere the last Marquis had slept.  East, West, North, and South, throughthe woods, four heavy-treading, unkempt figures crushed the high grassand cracked the branches, striding on cautiously to come together inthe courtyard.  Four lights broke out there, and moved away in differentdirections, and all was black again.But, not for long.  Presently, the chateau began to make itselfstrangely visible by some light of its own, as though it were growingluminous.  Then, a flickering streak played behind the architectureof the front, picking out transparent places, and showing wherebalustrades, arches, and windows were.  Then it soared higher, andgrew broader and brighter.  Soon, from a score of the great windows,flames burst forth, and the stone faces awakened, stared out of fire.A faint murmur arose about the house from the few people who were leftthere, and there was a saddling of a horse and riding away.  There wasspurring and splashing through the darkness, and bridle was drawn inthe space by the village fountain, and the horse in a foam stood atMonsieur Gabelle's door.  "Help, Gabelle!  Help, every one!"  Thetocsin rang impatiently, but other help (if that were any) there wasnone.  The mender of roads, and two hundred and fifty particularfriends, stood with folded arms at the fountain, looking at the pillarof fire in the sky.  "It must be forty feet high," said they, grimly;and never moved.The rider from the chateau, and the horse in a foam, clattered awaythrough the village, and galloped up the stony steep, to the prisonon the crag.  At the gate, a group of officers were looking at thefire; removed from them, a group of soldiers.  "Help, gentlemen--officers!  The chateau is on fire; valuable objects may be saved fromthe flames by timely aid!  Help, help!"  The officers looked towardsthe soldiers who looked at the fire; gave no orders; and answered,with shrugs and biting of lips, "It must burn."As the rider rattled down the hill again and through the street, thevillage was illuminating.  The mender of roads, and the two hundredand fifty particular friends, inspired as one man and woman by theidea of lighting up, had darted into their houses, and were puttingcandles in every dull little pane of glass.  The general scarcity ofeverything, occasioned candles to be borrowed in a rather peremptorymanner of Monsieur Gabelle; and in a moment of reluctance and hesitationon that functionary's part, the mender of roads, once so submissiveto authority, had remarked that carriages were good to make bonfireswith, and that post-horses would roast.The chateau was left to itself to flame and burn.  In the roaring andraging of the conflagration, a red-hot wind, driving straight fromthe infernal regions, seemed to be blowing the edifice away.  With therising and falling of the blaze, the stone faces showed as if they werein torment.  When great masses of stone and timber fell, the face withthe two dints in the nose became obscured:  anon struggled out of thesmoke again, as if it were the face of the cruel Marquis, burning atthe stake and contending with the fire.The chateau burned; the nearest trees, laid hold of by the fire,scorched and shrivelled; trees at a distance, fired by the four fiercefigures, begirt the blazing edifice with a new forest of smoke.  Moltenlead and iron boiled in the marble basin of the fountain; the waterran dry; the extinguisher tops of the towers vanished like ice beforethe heat, and trickled down into four rugged wells of flame.  Greatrents and splits branched out in the solid walls, like crystallisation;stupefied birds wheeled about and dropped into the furnace; four fiercefigures trudged away, East, West, North, and South, along the night-enshrouded roads, guided by the beacon they had lighted, towards theirnext destination.  The illuminated village had seized hold of thetocsin, and, abolishing the lawful ringer, rang for joy.Not only that; but the village, light-headed with famine, fire, andbell-ringing, and bethinking itself that Monsieur Gabelle had to dowith the collection of rent and taxes--though it was but a smallinstalment of taxes, and no rent at all, that Gabelle had got in thoselatter days--became impatient for an interview with him, and,surrounding his house, summoned him to come forth for personal conference.Whereupon, Monsieur Gabelle did heavily bar his door, and retire tohold counsel with himself.  The result of that conference was, thatGabelle again withdrew himself to his housetop behind his stack ofchimneys; this time resolved, if his door were broken in (he was asmall Southern man of retaliative temperament), to pitch himself headforemost over the parapet, and crush a man or two below.Probably, Monsieur Gabelle passed a long night up there, with thedistant chateau for fire and candle, and the beating at his door,combined with the joy-ringing, for music; not to mention his havingan ill-omened lamp slung across the road before his posting-house gate,which the village showed a lively inclination to displace in his favour.A trying suspense, to be passing a whole summer night on the brink ofthe black ocean, ready to take that plunge into it upon which MonsieurGabelle had resolved!  But, the friendly dawn appearing at last, andthe rush-candles of the village guttering out, the people happilydispersed, and Monsieur Gabelle came down bringing his life with himfor that while.Within a hundred miles, and in the light of other fires, there wereother functionaries less fortunate, that night and other nights, whomthe rising sun found hanging across once-peaceful streets, where theyhad been born and bred; also, there were other villagers and townspeopleless fortunate than the mender of roads and his fellows, upon whomthe functionaries and soldiery turned with success, and whom theystrung up in their turn.  But, the fierce figures were steadily wendingEast, West, North, and South, be that as it would; and whosoever hung,fire burned.  The altitude of the gallows that would turn to waterand quench it, no functionary, by any stretch of mathematics, wasable to calculate successfully.XXIVDrawn to the Loadstone RockIn such risings of fire and risings of sea--the firm earth shaken bythe rushes of an angry ocean which had now no ebb, but was always onthe flow, higher and higher, to the terror and wonder of the beholderson the shore--three years of tempest were consumed.  Three morebirthdays of little Lucie had been woven by the golden thread intothe peaceful tissue of the life of her home.Many a night and many a day had its inmates listened to the echoes inthe corner, with hearts that failed them when they heard the throngingfeet.  For, the footsteps had become to their minds as the footstepsof a people, tumultuous under a red flag and with their country declaredin danger, changed into wild beasts, by terrible enchantment longpersisted in.Monseigneur, as a class, had dissociated himself from the phenomenonof his not being appreciated:  of his being so little wanted in France,as to incur considerable danger of receiving his dismissal from it,and this life together.  Like the fabled rustic who raised the Devilwith infinite pains, and was so terrified at the sight of him that hecould ask the Enemy no question, but immediately fled; so, Monseigneur,after boldly reading the Lord's Prayer backwards for a great number ofyears, and performing many other potent spells for compelling the EvilOne, no sooner beheld him in his terrors than he took to his noble heels.The shining Bull's Eye of the Court was gone, or it would have beenthe mark for a hurricane of national bullets.  It had never been agood eye to see with--had long had the mote in it of Lucifer's pride,Sardanapalus's luxury, and a mole's blindness--but it had droppedout and was gone.  The Court, from that exclusive inner circle to itsoutermost rotten ring of intrigue, corruption, and dissimulation, wasall gone together.  Royalty was gone; had been besieged in its Palaceand "suspended," when the last tidings came over.The August of the year one thousand seven hundred and ninety-two wascome, and Monseigneur was by this time scattered far and wide.As was natural, the head-quarters and great gathering-place ofMonseigneur, in London, was Tellson's Bank.  Spirits are supposed tohaunt the places where their bodies most resorted, and Monseigneurwithout a guinea haunted the spot where his guineas used to be.Moreover, it was the spot to which such French intelligence as wasmost to be relied upon, came quickest.  Again:  Tellson's was amunificent house, and extended great liberality to old customers whohad fallen from their high estate.  Again:  those nobles who had seenthe coming storm in time, and anticipating plunder or confiscation,had made provident remittances to Tellson's, were always to be heardof there by their needy brethren.  To which it must be added that everynew-comer from France reported himself and his tidings at Tellson's,almost as a matter of course.  For such variety of reasons, Tellson'swas at that time, as to French intelligence, a kind of High Exchange;and this was so well known to the public, and the inquiries made therewere in consequence so numerous, that Tellson's sometimes wrote thelatest news out in a line or so and posted it in the Bank windows,for all who ran through Temple Bar to read.On a steaming, misty afternoon, Mr. Lorry sat at his desk, and CharlesDarnay stood leaning on it, talking with him in a low voice.  Thepenitential den once set apart for interviews with the House, was nowthe news-Exchange, and was filled to overflowing.  It was within halfan hour or so of the time of closing."But, although you are the youngest man that ever lived," said CharlesDarnay, rather hesitating, "I must still suggest to you--""I understand.  That I am too old?" said Mr. Lorry."Unsettled weather, a long journey, uncertain means of travelling, adisorganised country, a city that may not be even safe for you.""My dear Charles," said Mr. Lorry, with cheerful confidence, "youtouch some of the reasons for my going:  not for my staying away.It is safe enough for me; nobody will care to interfere with an oldfellow of hard upon fourscore when there are so many people theremuch better worth interfering with.  As to its being a disorganisedcity, if it were not a disorganised city there would be no occasionto send somebody from our House here to our House there, who knowsthe city and the business, of old, and is in Tellson's confidence.As to the uncertain travelling, the long journey, and the winterweather, if I were not prepared to submit myself to a few inconveniencesfor the sake of Tellson's, after all these years, who ought to be?""I wish I were going myself," said Charles Darnay, somewhat restlessly,and like one thinking aloud."Indeed!  You are a pretty fellow to object and advise!" exclaimedMr. Lorry.  "You wish you were going yourself?  And you a Frenchmanborn?  You are a wise counsellor.""My dear Mr. Lorry, it is because I am a Frenchman born, that thethought (which I did not mean to utter here, however) has passedthrough my mind often.  One cannot help thinking, having had somesympathy for the miserable people, and having abandoned something tothem," he spoke here in his former thoughtful manner, "that one mightbe listened to, and might have the power to persuade to some restraint.Only last night, after you had left us, when I was talking to Lucie--""When you were talking to Lucie," Mr. Lorry repeated.  "Yes.  I wonderyou are not ashamed to mention the name of Lucie!  Wishing you weregoing to France at this time of day!""However, I am not going," said Charles Darnay, with a smile.  "It ismore to the purpose that you say you are.""And I am, in plain reality.  The truth is, my dear Charles," Mr. Lorryglanced at the distant House, and lowered his voice, "you can have noconception of the difficulty with which our business is transacted,and of the peril in which our books and papers over yonder are involved.The Lord above knows what the compromising consequences would be tonumbers of people, if some of our documents were seized or destroyed;and they might be, at any time, you know, for who can say that Parisis not set afire to-day, or sacked to-morrow!  Now, a judicious selectionfrom these with the least possible delay, and the burying of them,or otherwise getting of them out of harm's way, is within the power(without loss of precious time) of scarcely any one but myself,if any one.  And shall I hang back, when Tellson's knows this and saysthis--Tellson's, whose bread I have eaten these sixty years--becauseI am a little stiff about the joints?  Why, I am a boy, sir, to halfa dozen old codgers here!""How I admire the gallantry of your youthful spirit, Mr. Lorry.""Tut!  Nonsense, sir!--And, my dear Charles," said Mr. Lorry, glancingat the House again, "you are to remember, that getting things out ofParis at this present time, no matter what things, is next to animpossibility.  Papers and precious matters were this very day broughtto us here (I speak in strict confidence; it is not business-like towhisper it, even to you), by the strangest bearers you can imagine,every one of whom had his head hanging on by a single hair as hepassed the Barriers.  At another time, our parcels would come and go,as easily as in business-like Old England; but now, everythingis stopped.""And do you really go to-night?""I really go to-night, for the case has become too pressing toadmit of delay.""And do you take no one with you?""All sorts of people have been proposed to me, but I will havenothing to say to any of them.  I intend to take Jerry.  Jerry hasbeen my bodyguard on Sunday nights for a long time past and I am usedto him.  Nobody will suspect Jerry of being anything but an Englishbull-dog, or of having any design in his head but to fly at anybodywho touches his master.""I must say again that I heartily admire your gallantry andyouthfulness.""I must say again, nonsense, nonsense!  When I have executed thislittle commission, I shall, perhaps, accept Tellson's proposal to retireand live at my ease.  Time enough, then, to think about growing old."This dialogue had taken place at Mr. Lorry's usual desk, with Monseigneurswarming within a yard or two of it, boastful of what he would do toavenge himself on the rascal-people before long.  It was too much theway of Monseigneur under his reverses as a refugee, and it was muchtoo much the way of native British orthodoxy, to talk of this terribleRevolution as if it were the only harvest ever known under the skiesthat had not been sown--as if nothing had ever been done, or omittedto be done, that had led to it--as if observers of the wretchedmillions in France, and of the misused and perverted resources thatshould have made them prosperous, had not seen it inevitably coming,years before, and had not in plain words recorded what they saw.  Suchvapouring, combined with the extravagant plots of Monseigneur for therestoration of a state of things that had utterly exhausted itself,and worn out Heaven and earth as well as itself, was hard to be enduredwithout some remonstrance by any sane man who knew the truth.  And itwas such vapouring all about his ears, like a troublesome confusion ofblood in his own head, added to a latent uneasiness in his mind, whichhad already made Charles Darnay restless, and which still kept him so.Among the talkers, was Stryver, of the King's Bench Bar, far on hisway to state promotion, and, therefore, loud on the theme:  broachingto Monseigneur, his devices for blowing the people up andexterminating them from the face of the earth, and doing without them:and for accomplishing many similar objects akin in their nature tothe abolition of eagles by sprinkling salt on the tails of the race.Him, Darnay heard with a particular feeling of objection; and Darnaystood divided between going away that he might hear no more, andremaining to interpose his word, when the thing that was to be, wenton to shape itself out.The House approached Mr. Lorry, and laying a soiled and unopenedletter before him, asked if he had yet discovered any traces of theperson to whom it was addressed?  The House laid the letter down soclose to Darnay that he saw the direction--the more quickly becauseit was his own right name.  The address, turned into English, ran:"Very pressing.  To Monsieur heretofore the Marquis St. Evremonde,of France.  Confided to the cares of Messrs. Tellson and Co., Bankers,London, England."On the marriage morning, Doctor Manette had made it his one urgentand express request to Charles Darnay, that the secret of this nameshould be--unless he, the Doctor, dissolved the obligation--keptinviolate between them.  Nobody else knew it to be his name; his ownwife had no suspicion of the fact; Mr. Lorry could have none."No," said Mr. Lorry, in reply to the House; "I have referred it,I think, to everybody now here, and no one can tell me where thisgentleman is to be found."The hands of the clock verging upon the hour of closing the Bank,there was a general set of the current of talkers past Mr. Lorry'sdesk.  He held the letter out inquiringly; and Monseigneur looked atit, in the person of this plotting and indignant refugee; andMonseigneur looked at it in the person of that plotting and indignantrefugee; and This, That, and The Other, all had something disparagingto say, in French or in English, concerning the Marquis who was notto be found."Nephew, I believe--but in any case degenerate successor--of thepolished Marquis who was murdered," said one.  "Happy to say, I neverknew him.""A craven who abandoned his post," said another--this Monseigneurhad been got out of Paris, legs uppermost and half suffocated, in aload of hay--"some years ago.""Infected with the new doctrines," said a third, eyeing the directionthrough his glass in passing; "set himself in opposition to the lastMarquis, abandoned the estates when he inherited them, and left themto the ruffian herd.  They will recompense him now, I hope,as he deserves.""Hey?" cried the blatant Stryver.  "Did he though?  Is that the sortof fellow?  Let us look at his infamous name.  D--n the fellow!"Darnay, unable to restrain himself any longer, touched Mr. Stryver onthe shoulder, and said:"I know the fellow.""Do you, by Jupiter?" said Stryver.  "I am sorry for it.""Why?""Why, Mr. Darnay?  D'ye hear what he did?  Don't ask, why,in these times.""But I do ask why?""Then I tell you again, Mr. Darnay, I am sorry for it.  I am sorry tohear you putting any such extraordinary questions.  Here is a fellow,who, infected by the most pestilent and blasphemous code of devilrythat ever was known, abandoned his property to the vilest scum of theearth that ever did murder by wholesale, and you ask me why I amsorry that a man who instructs youth knows him?  Well, but I'llanswer you.  I am sorry because I believe there is contamination insuch a scoundrel.  That's why."Mindful of the secret, Darnay with great difficulty checked himself,and said:  "You may not understand the gentleman.""I understand how to put _you_ in a corner, Mr. Darnay," said BullyStryver, "and I'll do it.  If this fellow is a gentleman, I _don't_understand him.  You may tell him so, with my compliments.  You mayalso tell him, from me, that after abandoning his worldly goods andposition to this butcherly mob, I wonder he is not at the head of them.But, no, gentlemen," said Stryver, looking all round, and snapping hisfingers, "I know something of human nature, and I tell you that you'llnever find a fellow like this fellow, trusting himself to the merciesof such precious _protgs_.  No, gentlemen; he'll always show 'ema clean pair of heels very early in the scuffle, and sneak away."With those words, and a final snap of his fingers, Mr. Stryvershouldered himself into Fleet-street, amidst the general approbationof his hearers.  Mr. Lorry and Charles Darnay were left alone at thedesk, in the general departure from the Bank."Will you take charge of the letter?" said Mr. Lorry.  "You knowwhere to deliver it?""I do.""Will you undertake to explain, that we suppose it to have beenaddressed here, on the chance of our knowing where to forward it,and that it has been here some time?""I will do so.  Do you start for Paris from here?""From here, at eight.""I will come back, to see you off."Very ill at ease with himself, and with Stryver and most other men,Darnay made the best of his way into the quiet of the Temple,opened the letter, and read it.  These were its contents:"Prison of the Abbaye, Paris."June 21, 1792."MONSIEUR HERETOFORE THE MARQUIS."After having long been in danger of my life at the hands of thevillage, I have been seized, with great violence and indignity, andbrought a long journey on foot to Paris.  On the road I have suffereda great deal.  Nor is that all; my house has been destroyed--razedto the ground."The crime for which I am imprisoned, Monsieur heretofore theMarquis, and for which I shall be summoned before the tribunal, andshall lose my life (without your so generous help), is, they tell me,treason against the majesty of the people, in that I have actedagainst them for an emigrant.  It is in vain I represent that I haveacted for them, and not against, according to your commands.  It isin vain I represent that, before the sequestration of emigrantproperty, I had remitted the imposts they had ceased to pay; that Ihad collected no rent; that I had had recourse to no process.  Theonly response is, that I have acted for an emigrant, and where isthat emigrant?"Ah! most gracious Monsieur heretofore the Marquis, where is thatemigrant?  I cry in my sleep where is he?  I demand of Heaven, willhe not come to deliver me?  No answer.  Ah Monsieur heretofore theMarquis, I send my desolate cry across the sea, hoping it may perhapsreach your ears through the great bank of Tilson known at Paris!"For the love of Heaven, of justice, of generosity, of the honour ofyour noble name, I supplicate you, Monsieur heretofore the Marquis,to succour and release me.  My fault is, that I have been true to you.Oh Monsieur heretofore the Marquis, I pray you be you true to me!"From this prison here of horror, whence I every hour tend nearerand nearer to destruction, I send you, Monsieur heretofore the Marquis,the assurance of my dolorous and unhappy service."Your afflicted,"Gabelle."The latent uneasiness in Darnay's mind was roused to vigourous lifeby this letter.  The peril of an old servant and a good one, whoseonly crime was fidelity to himself and his family, stared him soreproachfully in the face, that, as he walked to and fro in the Templeconsidering what to do, he almost hid his face from the passersby.He knew very well, that in his horror of the deed which had culminatedthe bad deeds and bad reputation of the old family house, in hisresentful suspicions of his uncle, and in the aversion with which hisconscience regarded the crumbling fabric that he was supposed touphold, he had acted imperfectly.  He knew very well, that in his lovefor Lucie, his renunciation of his social place, though by no meansnew to his own mind, had been hurried and incomplete.  He knew thathe ought to have systematically worked it out and supervised it, andthat he had meant to do it, and that it had never been done.The happiness of his own chosen English home, the necessity of beingalways actively employed, the swift changes and troubles of the timewhich had followed on one another so fast, that the events of thisweek annihilated the immature plans of last week, and the events ofthe week following made all new again; he knew very well, that to theforce of these circumstances he had yielded:--not without disquiet,but still without continuous and accumulating resistance.  That hehad watched the times for a time of action, and that they had shiftedand struggled until the time had gone by, and the nobility weretrooping from France by every highway and byway, and their propertywas in course of confiscation and destruction, and their very nameswere blotting out, was as well known to himself as it could be to anynew authority in France that might impeach him for it.But, he had oppressed no man, he had imprisoned no man; he was so farfrom having harshly exacted payment of his dues, that he hadrelinquished them of his own will, thrown himself on a world with nofavour in it, won his own private place there, and earned his ownbread.  Monsieur Gabelle had held the impoverished and involved estateon written instructions, to spare the people, to give them what littlethere was to give--such fuel as the heavy creditors would let themhave in the winter, and such produce as could be saved from the samegrip in the summer--and no doubt he had put the fact in plea and proof,for his own safety, so that it could not but appear now.This favoured the desperate resolution Charles Darnay had begun to make,that he would go to Paris.Yes.  Like the mariner in the old story, the winds and streams haddriven him within the influence of the Loadstone Rock, and it wasdrawing him to itself, and he must go.  Everything that arose beforehis mind drifted him on, faster and faster, more and more steadily,to the terrible attraction.  His latent uneasiness had been, that badaims were being worked out in his own unhappy land by bad instruments,and that he who could not fail to know that he was better than they,was not there, trying to do something to stay bloodshed, and assertthe claims of mercy and humanity.  With this uneasiness half stifled,and half reproaching him, he had been brought to the pointed comparisonof himself with the brave old gentleman in whom duty was so strong;upon that comparison (injurious to himself) had instantly followedthe sneers of Monseigneur, which had stung him bitterly, and those ofStryver, which above all were coarse and galling, for old reasons.Upon those, had followed Gabelle's letter:  the appeal of an innocentprisoner, in danger of death, to his justice, honour, and good name.His resolution was made.  He must go to Paris.Yes.  The Loadstone Rock was drawing him, and he must sail on, untilhe struck.  He knew of no rock; he saw hardly any danger.  Theintention with which he had done what he had done, even although hehad left it incomplete, presented it before him in an aspect thatwould be gratefully acknowledged in France on his presenting himselfto assert it.  Then, that glorious vision of doing good, which is sooften the sanguine mirage of so many good minds, arose before him,and he even saw himself in the illusion with some influence to guidethis raging Revolution that was running so fearfully wild.As he walked to and fro with his resolution made, he considered thatneither Lucie nor her father must know of it until he was gone.Lucie should be spared the pain of separation; and her father, alwaysreluctant to turn his thoughts towards the dangerous ground of old,should come to the knowledge of the step, as a step taken, and not inthe balance of suspense and doubt.  How much of the incompleteness ofhis situation was referable to her father, through the painfulanxiety to avoid reviving old associations of France in his mind, hedid not discuss with himself.  But, that circumstance too,had had its influence in his course.He walked to and fro, with thoughts very busy, until it was time toreturn to Tellson's and take leave of Mr. Lorry.  As soon as hearrived in Paris he would present himself to this old friend, but hemust say nothing of his intention now.A carriage with post-horses was ready at the Bank door, and Jerrywas booted and equipped."I have delivered that letter," said Charles Darnay to Mr. Lorry."I would not consent to your being charged with any written answer,but perhaps you will take a verbal one?""That I will, and readily," said Mr. Lorry, "if it is not dangerous.""Not at all.  Though it is to a prisoner in the Abbaye.""What is his name?" said Mr. Lorry, with his open pocket-book in his hand."Gabelle.""Gabelle.  And what is the message to the unfortunate Gabelle in prison?""Simply, `that he has received the letter, and will come.'""Any time mentioned?""He will start upon his journey to-morrow night.""Any person mentioned?""No."He helped Mr. Lorry to wrap himself in a number of coats and cloaks,and went out with him from the warm atmosphere of the old Bank, intothe misty air of Fleet-street.  "My love to Lucie, and to littleLucie," said Mr. Lorry at parting, "and take precious care of themtill I come back."  Charles Darnay shook his head and doubtfully smiled,as the carriage rolled away.That night--it was the fourteenth of August--he sat up late, andwrote two fervent letters; one was to Lucie, explaining the strongobligation he was under to go to Paris, and showing her, at length,the reasons that he had, for feeling confident that he could becomeinvolved in no personal danger there; the other was to the Doctor,confiding Lucie and their dear child to his care, and dwelling onthe same topics with the strongest assurances.  To both, he wrotethat he would despatch letters in proof of his safety, immediatelyafter his arrival.It was a hard day, that day of being among them, with the firstreservation of their joint lives on his mind.  It was a hard matterto preserve the innocent deceit of which they were profoundlyunsuspicious.  But, an affectionate glance at his wife, so happy andbusy, made him resolute not to tell her what impended (he had beenhalf moved to do it, so strange it was to him to act in anythingwithout her quiet aid), and the day passed quickly.  Early in theevening he embraced her, and her scarcely less dear namesake, pretendingthat he would return by-and-bye (an imaginary engagement took him out,and he had secreted a valise of clothes ready), and so he emergedinto the heavy mist of the heavy streets, with a heavier heart.The unseen force was drawing him fast to itself, now, and all thetides and winds were setting straight and strong towards it.  He lefthis two letters with a trusty porter, to be delivered half an hourbefore midnight, and no sooner; took horse for Dover; and began hisjourney.  "For the love of Heaven, of justice, of generosity, of thehonour of your noble name!" was the poor prisoner's cry with whichhe strengthened his sinking heart, as he left all that was dear onearth behind him, and floated away for the Loadstone Rock.The end of the second book.Book the Third--the Track of a StormIIn SecretThe traveller fared slowly on his way, who fared towards Paris fromEngland in the autumn of the year one thousand seven hundred andninety-two.  More than enough of bad roads, bad equipages, and badhorses, he would have encountered to delay him, though the fallen andunfortunate King of France had been upon his throne in all his glory;but, the changed times were fraught with other obstacles than these.Every town-gate and village taxing-house had its band of citizen-patriots, with their national muskets in a most explosive state ofreadiness, who stopped all comers and goers, cross-questioned them,inspected their papers, looked for their names in lists of their own,turned them back, or sent them on, or stopped them and laid them inhold, as their capricious judgment or fancy deemed best for thedawning Republic One and Indivisible, of Liberty, Equality,Fraternity, or Death.A very few French leagues of his journey were accomplished, whenCharles Darnay began to perceive that for him along these countryroads there was no hope of return until he should have been declareda good citizen at Paris.  Whatever might befall now, he must on tohis journey's end.  Not a mean village closed upon him, not a commonbarrier dropped across the road behind him, but he knew it to beanother iron door in the series that was barred between him andEngland.  The universal watchfulness so encompassed him, that if hehad been taken in a net, or were being forwarded to his destinationin a cage, he could not have felt his freedom more completely gone.This universal watchfulness not only stopped him on the highwaytwenty times in a stage, but retarded his progress twenty times in aday, by riding after him and taking him back, riding before him andstopping him by anticipation, riding with him and keeping him incharge.  He had been days upon his journey in France alone, when hewent to bed tired out, in a little town on the high road, still along way from Paris.Nothing but the production of the afflicted Gabelle's letter from hisprison of the Abbaye would have got him on so far.  His difficulty atthe guard-house in this small place had been such, that he felt hisjourney to have come to a crisis.  And he was, therefore, as littlesurprised as a man could be, to find himself awakened at the smallinn to which he had been remitted until morning, in the middle of thenight.Awakened by a timid local functionary and three armed patriots inrough red caps and with pipes in their mouths, who sat down on the bed."Emigrant," said the functionary, "I am going to send you on to Paris,under an escort.""Citizen, I desire nothing more than to get to Paris, though I coulddispense with the escort.""Silence!" growled a red-cap, striking at the coverlet with thebutt-end of his musket.  "Peace, aristocrat!""It is as the good patriot says," observed the timid functionary."You are an aristocrat, and must have an escort--and must pay for it.""I have no choice," said Charles Darnay."Choice!  Listen to him!" cried the same scowling red-cap.  "As if itwas not a favour to be protected from the lamp-iron!""It is always as the good patriot says," observed the functionary."Rise and dress yourself, emigrant."Darnay complied, and was taken back to the guard-house, where otherpatriots in rough red caps were smoking, drinking, and sleeping, by awatch-fire.  Here he paid a heavy price for his escort, and hence hestarted with it on the wet, wet roads at three o'clock in the morning.The escort were two mounted patriots in red caps and tri-colouredcockades, armed with national muskets and sabres, who rode one oneither side of him.The escorted governed his own horse, but a loose line was attached tohis bridle, the end of which one of the patriots kept girded roundhis wrist.  In this state they set forth with the sharp rain drivingin their faces:  clattering at a heavy dragoon trot over the uneventown pavement, and out upon the mire-deep roads.  In this state theytraversed without change, except of horses and pace, all the mire-deep leagues that lay between them and the capital.They travelled in the night, halting an hour or two after daybreak,and lying by until the twilight fell.  The escort were so wretchedlyclothed, that they twisted straw round their bare legs, and thatchedtheir ragged shoulders to keep the wet off.  Apart from the personaldiscomfort of being so attended, and apart from such considerationsof present danger as arose from one of the patriots being chronicallydrunk, and carrying his musket very recklessly, Charles Darnay didnot allow the restraint that was laid upon him to awaken any seriousfears in his breast; for, he reasoned with himself that it could haveno reference to the merits of an individual case that was not yetstated, and of representations, confirmable by the prisoner in theAbbaye, that were not yet made.But when they came to the town of Beauvais--which they did ateventide, when the streets were filled with people--he could notconceal from himself that the aspect of affairs was very alarming.An ominous crowd gathered to see him dismount of the posting-yard,and many voices called out loudly, "Down with the emigrant!"He stopped in the act of swinging himself out of his saddle, and,resuming it as his safest place, said:"Emigrant, my friends!  Do you not see me here, in France, of myown will?""You are a cursed emigrant," cried a farrier, making at him in afurious manner through the press, hammer in hand; "and you are acursed aristocrat!"The postmaster interposed himself between this man and the rider'sbridle (at which he was evidently making), and soothingly said,"Let him be; let him be!  He will be judged at Paris.""Judged!" repeated the farrier, swinging his hammer."Ay! and condemned as a traitor."  At this the crowd roared approval.Checking the postmaster, who was for turning his horse's head to theyard (the drunken patriot sat composedly in his saddle looking on,with the line round his wrist), Darnay said, as soon as he could makehis voice heard:"Friends, you deceive yourselves, or you are deceived.  I am nota traitor.""He lies!" cried the smith. "He is a traitor since the decree.His life is forfeit to the people.  His cursed life is not his own!"At the instant when Darnay saw a rush in the eyes of the crowd,which another instant would have brought upon him, the postmasterturned his horse into the yard, the escort rode in close upon hishorse's flanks, and the postmaster shut and barred the crazy doublegates.  The farrier struck a blow upon them with his hammer, and thecrowd groaned; but, no more was done."What is this decree that the smith spoke of?" Darnay asked thepostmaster, when he had thanked him, and stood beside him in the yard."Truly, a decree for selling the property of emigrants.""When passed?""On the fourteenth.""The day I left England!""Everybody says it is but one of several, and that there will beothers--if there are not already--banishing all emigrants, andcondemning all to death who return.  That is what he meant when hesaid your life was not your own.""But there are no such decrees yet?""What do I know!" said the postmaster, shrugging his shoulders;"there may be, or there will be.  It is all the same.  What wouldyou have?"They rested on some straw in a loft until the middle of the night,and then rode forward again when all the town was asleep.  Among themany wild changes observable on familiar things which made this wildride unreal, not the least was the seeming rarity of sleep.After long and lonely spurring over dreary roads, they would come toa cluster of poor cottages, not steeped in darkness, but allglittering with lights, and would find the people, in a ghostlymanner in the dead of the night, circling hand in hand round ashrivelled tree of Liberty, or all drawn up together singing aLiberty song.  Happily, however, there was sleep in Beauvais thatnight to help them out of it and they passed on once more intosolitude and loneliness:  jingling through the untimely cold and wet,among impoverished fields that had yielded no fruits of the earththat year, diversified by the blackened remains of burnt houses, andby the sudden emergence from ambuscade, and sharp reining up acrosstheir way, of patriot patrols on the watch on all the roads.Daylight at last found them before the wall of Paris.  The barrierwas closed and strongly guarded when they rode up to it."Where are the papers of this prisoner?" demanded a resolute-lookingman in authority, who was summoned out by the guard.Naturally struck by the disagreeable word, Charles Darnay requestedthe speaker to take notice that he was a free traveller and Frenchcitizen, in charge of an escort which the disturbed state of thecountry had imposed upon him, and which he had paid for."Where," repeated the same personage, without taking any heed of himwhatever, "are the papers of this prisoner?"The drunken patriot had them in his cap, and produced them.  Casting hiseyes over Gabelle's letter, the same personage in authority showedsome disorder and surprise, and looked at Darnay with a close attention.He left escort and escorted without saying a word, however, and wentinto the guard-room; meanwhile, they sat upon their horses outsidethe gate.  Looking about him while in this state of suspense, CharlesDarnay observed that the gate was held by a mixed guard of soldiersand patriots, the latter far outnumbering the former; and that whileingress into the city for peasants' carts bringing in supplies, andfor similar traffic and traffickers, was easy enough, egress, evenfor the homeliest people, was very difficult.  A numerous medley ofmen and women, not to mention beasts and vehicles of various sorts,was waiting to issue forth; but, the previous identification was sostrict, that they filtered through the barrier very slowly.  Some ofthese people knew their turn for examination to be so far off, thatthey lay down on the ground to sleep or smoke, while others talkedtogether, or loitered about.  The red cap and tri-colour cockade wereuniversal, both among men and women.When he had sat in his saddle some half-hour, taking note of thesethings, Darnay found himself confronted by the same man in authority,who directed the guard to open the barrier.  Then he delivered to theescort, drunk and sober, a receipt for the escorted, and requested himto dismount.  He did so, and the two patriots, leading his tired horse,turned and rode away without entering the city.He accompanied his conductor into a guard-room, smelling of commonwine and tobacco, where certain soldiers and patriots, asleep andawake, drunk and sober, and in various neutral states betweensleeping and waking, drunkenness and sobriety, were standing andlying about.  The light in the guard-house, half derived from thewaning oil-lamps of the night, and half from the overcast day, was ina correspondingly uncertain condition.  Some registers were lyingopen on a desk, and an officer of a coarse, dark aspect, presidedover these."Citizen Defarge," said he to Darnay's conductor, as he took a slipof paper to write on.  "Is this the emigrant Evremonde?""This is the man.""Your age, Evremonde?""Thirty-seven.""Married, Evremonde?""Yes.""Where married?""In England.""Without doubt.  Where is your wife, Evremonde?""In England.""Without doubt.  You are consigned, Evremonde, to the prison of La Force.""Just Heaven!" exclaimed Darnay.  "Under what law, and for what offence?"The officer looked up from his slip of paper for a moment."We have new laws, Evremonde, and new offences, since you were here."He said it with a hard smile, and went on writing."I entreat you to observe that I have come here voluntarily, in responseto that written appeal of a fellow-countryman which lies before you.I demand no more than the opportunity to do so without delay.Is not that my right?""Emigrants have no rights, Evremonde," was the stolid reply.The officer wrote until he had finished, read over to himself what hehad written, sanded it, and handed it to Defarge, with the words"In secret."Defarge motioned with the paper to the prisoner that he mustaccompany him.  The prisoner obeyed, and a guard of two armedpatriots attended them."Is it you," said Defarge, in a low voice, as they went down theguardhouse steps and turned into Paris, "who married the daughter ofDoctor Manette, once a prisoner in the Bastille that is no more?""Yes," replied Darnay, looking at him with surprise."My name is Defarge, and I keep a wine-shop in the Quarter SaintAntoine.  Possibly you have heard of me.""My wife came to your house to reclaim her father?  Yes!"The word "wife" seemed to serve as a gloomy reminder to Defarge,to say with sudden impatience, "In the name of that sharp femalenewly-born, and called La Guillotine, why did you come to France?""You heard me say why, a minute ago.  Do you not believe it is thetruth?""A bad truth for you," said Defarge, speaking with knitted brows,and looking straight before him."Indeed I am lost here.  All here is so unprecedented, so changed,so sudden and unfair, that I am absolutely lost.  Will you render mea little help?""None."  Defarge spoke, always looking straight before him."Will you answer me a single question?""Perhaps.  According to its nature.  You can say what it is.""In this prison that I am going to so unjustly, shall I have somefree communication with the world outside?""You will see.""I am not to be buried there, prejudged, and without any means ofpresenting my case?""You will see.  But, what then?  Other people have been similarlyburied in worse prisons, before now.""But never by me, Citizen Defarge."Defarge glanced darkly at him for answer, and walked on in a steadyand set silence.  The deeper he sank into this silence, the fainterhope there was--or so Darnay thought--of his softening in any slightdegree.  He, therefore, made haste to say:"It is of the utmost importance to me (you know, Citizen, even betterthan I, of how much importance), that I should be able to communicateto Mr. Lorry of Tellson's Bank, an English gentleman who is now inParis, the simple fact, without comment, that I have been thrown intothe prison of La Force.  Will you cause that to be done for me?""I will do," Defarge doggedly rejoined, "nothing for you.  My duty isto my country and the People.  I am the sworn servant of both,against you.  I will do nothing for you."Charles Darnay felt it hopeless to entreat him further, and his pridewas touched besides.  As they walked on in silence, he could not butsee how used the people were to the spectacle of prisoners passingalong the streets.  The very children scarcely noticed him.  A fewpassers turned their heads, and a few shook their fingers at him asan aristocrat; otherwise, that a man in good clothes should be goingto prison, was no more remarkable than that a labourer in workingclothes should be going to work.  In one narrow, dark, and dirtystreet through which they passed, an excited orator, mounted on a stool,was addressing an excited audience on the crimes against the people,of the king and the royal family.  The few words that he caught fromthis man's lips, first made it known to Charles Darnay that the kingwas in prison, and that the foreign ambassadors had one and all leftParis.  On the road (except at Beauvais) he had heard absolutely nothing.The escort and the universal watchfulness had completely isolated him.That he had fallen among far greater dangers than those which haddeveloped themselves when he left England, he of course knew now.That perils had thickened about him fast, and might thicken fasterand faster yet, he of course knew now.  He could not but admit tohimself that he might not have made this journey, if he could haveforeseen the events of a few days.  And yet his misgivings were notso dark as, imagined by the light of this later time, they would appear.Troubled as the future was, it was the unknown future, and in itsobscurity there was ignorant hope.  The horrible massacre, days andnights long, which, within a few rounds of the clock, was to set agreat mark of blood upon the blessed garnering time of harvest, wasas far out of his knowledge as if it had been a hundred thousandyears away.  The "sharp female newly-born, and called La Guillotine,"was hardly known to him, or to the generality of people, by name.The frightful deeds that were to be soon done, were probablyunimagined at that time in the brains of the doers.  How could theyhave a place in the shadowy conceptions of a gentle mind?Of unjust treatment in detention and hardship, and in cruelseparation from his wife and child, he foreshadowed the likelihood,or the certainty; but, beyond this, he dreaded nothing distinctly.With this on his mind, which was enough to carry into a dreary prisoncourtyard, he arrived at the prison of La Force.A man with a bloated face opened the strong wicket, to whom Defargepresented "The Emigrant Evremonde.""What the Devil!  How many more of them!" exclaimed the man withthe bloated face.Defarge took his receipt without noticing the exclamation,and withdrew, with his two fellow-patriots."What the Devil, I say again!" exclaimed the gaoler, left with his wife."How many more!"The gaoler's wife, being provided with no answer to the question,merely replied, "One must have patience, my dear!"  Three turnkeys whoentered responsive to a bell she rang, echoed the sentiment, and oneadded, "For the love of Liberty;" which sounded in that place like aninappropriate conclusion.The prison of La Force was a gloomy prison, dark and filthy, and witha horrible smell of foul sleep in it.  Extraordinary how soon thenoisome flavour of imprisoned sleep, becomes manifest in all suchplaces that are ill cared for!"In secret, too," grumbled the gaoler, looking at the written paper."As if I was not already full to bursting!"He stuck the paper on a file, in an ill-humour, and Charles Darnayawaited his further pleasure for half an hour:  sometimes, pacing toand fro in the strong arched room:  sometimes, resting on a stone seat:in either case detained to be imprinted on the memory of the chiefand his subordinates."Come!" said the chief, at length taking up his keys, "come with me,emigrant."Through the dismal prison twilight, his new charge accompanied him bycorridor and staircase, many doors clanging and locking behind them,until they came into a large, low, vaulted chamber, crowded withprisoners of both sexes.  The women were seated at a long table,reading and writing, knitting, sewing, and embroidering; the men werefor the most part standing behind their chairs, or lingering up anddown the room.In the instinctive association of prisoners with shameful crime anddisgrace, the new-comer recoiled from this company.  But the crowningunreality of his long unreal ride, was, their all at once rising toreceive him, with every refinement of manner known to the time, andwith all the engaging graces and courtesies of life.So strangely clouded were these refinements by the prison manners andgloom, so spectral did they become in the inappropriate squalor andmisery through which they were seen, that Charles Darnay seemed tostand in a company of the dead.  Ghosts all!  The ghost of beauty,the ghost of stateliness, the ghost of elegance, the ghost of pride,the ghost of frivolity, the ghost of wit, the ghost of youth, theghost of age, all waiting their dismissal from the desolate shore,all turning on him eyes that were changed by the death they had diedin coming there.It struck him motionless.  The gaoler standing at his side, and theother gaolers moving about, who would have been well enough as toappearance in the ordinary exercise of their functions, looked soextravagantly coarse contrasted with sorrowing mothers and bloomingdaughters who were there--with the apparitions of the coquette,the young beauty, and the mature woman delicately bred--that theinversion of all experience and likelihood which the scene of shadowspresented, was heightened to its utmost.  Surely, ghosts all.Surely, the long unreal ride some progress of disease that hadbrought him to these gloomy shades!"In the name of the assembled companions in misfortune," said agentleman of courtly appearance and address, coming forward,"I have the honour of giving you welcome to La Force, and ofcondoling with you on the calamity that has brought you among us.May it soon terminate happily!  It would be an impertinence elsewhere,but it is not so here, to ask your name and condition?"Charles Darnay roused himself, and gave the required information,in words as suitable as he could find."But I hope," said the gentleman, following the chief gaoler with hiseyes, who moved across the room, "that you are not in secret?""I do not understand the meaning of the term, but I have heard themsay so.""Ah, what a pity!  We so much regret it!  But take courage; severalmembers of our society have been in secret, at first, and it haslasted but a short time."  Then he added, raising his voice,"I grieve to inform the society--in secret."There was a murmur of commiseration as Charles Darnay crossed theroom to a grated door where the gaoler awaited him, and manyvoices--among which, the soft and compassionate voices of women wereconspicuous--gave him good wishes and encouragement.  He turned atthe grated door, to render the thanks of his heart; it closed underthe gaoler's hand; and the apparitions vanished from his sight forever.The wicket opened on a stone staircase, leading upward.  When theyhad ascended forty steps (the prisoner of half an hour alreadycounted them), the gaoler opened a low black door, and they passedinto a solitary cell.  It struck cold and damp, but was not dark."Yours," said the gaoler."Why am I confined alone?""How do I know!""I can buy pen, ink, and paper?""Such are not my orders.  You will be visited, and can ask then.At present, you may buy your food, and nothing more."There were in the cell, a chair, a table, and a straw mattress.As the gaoler made a general inspection of these objects, and of thefour walls, before going out, a wandering fancy wandered through themind of the prisoner leaning against the wall opposite to him, thatthis gaoler was so unwholesomely bloated, both in face and person,as to look like a man who had been drowned and filled with water.When the gaoler was gone, he thought in the same wandering way,"Now am I left, as if I were dead."  Stopping then, to look down atthe mattress, he turned from it with a sick feeling, and thought,"And here in these crawling creatures is the first condition of thebody after death.""Five paces by four and a half, five paces by four and a half, fivepaces by four and a half."  The prisoner walked to and fro in hiscell, counting its measurement, and the roar of the city arose likemuffled drums with a wild swell of voices added to them.  "He madeshoes, he made shoes, he made shoes."  The prisoner counted themeasurement again, and paced faster, to draw his mind with him fromthat latter repetition.  "The ghosts that vanished when the wicketclosed.  There was one among them, the appearance of a lady dressedin black, who was leaning in the embrasure of a window, and she had alight shining upon her golden hair, and she looked like * * * * Letus ride on again, for God's sake, through the illuminated villageswith the people all awake! * * * * He made shoes, he made shoes,he made shoes. * * * * Five paces by four and a half."  With such scrapstossing and rolling upward from the depths of his mind, the prisonerwalked faster and faster, obstinately counting and counting; and theroar of the city changed to this extent--that it still rolled in likemuffled drums, but with the wail of voices that he knew, in the swellthat rose above them.IIThe GrindstoneTellson's Bank, established in the Saint Germain Quarter of Paris,was in a wing of a large house, approached by a courtyard and shutoff from the street by a high wall and a strong gate.  The housebelonged to a great nobleman who had lived in it until he made aflight from the troubles, in his own cook's dress, and got across theborders.  A mere beast of the chase flying from hunters, he was stillin his metempsychosis no other than the same Monseigneur, thepreparation of whose chocolate for whose lips had once occupied threestrong men besides the cook in question.Monseigneur gone, and the three strong men absolving themselves fromthe sin of having drawn his high wages, by being more than ready andwilling to cut his throat on the altar of the dawning Republic one andindivisible of Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death, Monseigneur'shouse had been first sequestrated, and then confiscated.  For, allthings moved so fast, and decree followed decree with that fierceprecipitation, that now upon the third night of the autumn month ofSeptember, patriot emissaries of the law were in possession ofMonseigneur's house, and had marked it with the tri-colour, and weredrinking brandy in its state apartments.A place of business in London like Tellson's place of business inParis, would soon have driven the House out of its mind and into theGazette.  For, what would staid British responsibility andrespectability have said to orange-trees in boxes in a Bank courtyard,and even to a Cupid over the counter?  Yet such things were.Tellson's had whitewashed the Cupid, but he was still to be seen onthe ceiling, in the coolest linen, aiming (as he very often does) atmoney from morning to night.  Bankruptcy must inevitably have come ofthis young Pagan, in Lombard-street, London, and also of a curtainedalcove in the rear of the immortal boy, and also of a looking-glasslet into the wall, and also of clerks not at all old, who danced inpublic on the slightest provocation.  Yet, a French Tellson's couldget on with these things exceedingly well, and, as long as the timesheld together, no man had taken fright at them, and drawn out his money.What money would be drawn out of Tellson's henceforth, and what wouldlie there, lost and forgotten; what plate and jewels would tarnish inTellson's hiding-places, while the depositors rusted in prisons, andwhen they should have violently perished; how many accounts withTellson's never to be balanced in this world, must be carried overinto the next; no man could have said, that night, any more thanMr. Jarvis Lorry could, though he thought heavily of these questions.He sat by a newly-lighted wood fire (the blighted and unfruitful yearwas prematurely cold), and on his honest and courageous face therewas a deeper shade than the pendent lamp could throw, or any objectin the room distortedly reflect--a shade of horror.He occupied rooms in the Bank, in his fidelity to the House of whichhe had grown to be a part, like strong root-ivy.  It chanced that theyderived a kind of security from the patriotic occupation of the mainbuilding, but the true-hearted old gentleman never calculated aboutthat.  All such circumstances were indifferent to him, so that he didhis duty.  On the opposite side of the courtyard, under a colonnade,was extensive standing--for carriages--where, indeed, some carriagesof Monseigneur yet stood.  Against two of the pillars were fastenedtwo great flaring flambeaux, and in the light of these, standing outin the open air, was a large grindstone:  a roughly mounted thingwhich appeared to have hurriedly been brought there from someneighbouring smithy, or other workshop.  Rising and looking out ofwindow at these harmless objects, Mr. Lorry shivered, and retired tohis seat by the fire.  He had opened, not only the glass window, butthe lattice blind outside it, and he had closed both again, and heshivered through his frame.From the streets beyond the high wall and the strong gate, there camethe usual night hum of the city, with now and then an indescribablering in it, weird and unearthly, as if some unwonted sounds of aterrible nature were going up to Heaven."Thank God," said Mr. Lorry, clasping his hands, "that no one nearand dear to me is in this dreadful town to-night.  May He have mercyon all who are in danger!"Soon afterwards, the bell at the great gate sounded, and he thought,"They have come back!" and sat listening.  But, there was no loudirruption into the courtyard, as he had expected, and he heard thegate clash again, and all was quiet.The nervousness and dread that were upon him inspired that vagueuneasiness respecting the Bank, which a great change would naturallyawaken, with such feelings roused.  It was well guarded, and he gotup to go among the trusty people who were watching it, when his doorsuddenly opened, and two figures rushed in, at sight of which he fellback in amazement.Lucie and her father!  Lucie with her arms stretched out to him, andwith that old look of earnestness so concentrated and intensified,that it seemed as though it had been stamped upon her face expresslyto give force and power to it in this one passage of her life."What is this?" cried Mr. Lorry, breathless and confused."What is the matter?  Lucie!  Manette!  What has happened?  What hasbrought you here?  What is it?"With the look fixed upon him, in her paleness and wildness,she panted out in his arms, imploringly, "O my dear friend!My husband!""Your husband, Lucie?""Charles.""What of Charles?""Here."Here, in Paris?""Has been here some days--three or four--I don't know how many--I can't collect my thoughts.  An errand of generosity brought himhere unknown to us; he was stopped at the barrier, and sent to prison."The old man uttered an irrepressible cry.  Almost at the same moment,the beg of the great gate rang again, and a loud noise of feet andvoices came pouring into the courtyard."What is that noise?" said the Doctor, turning towards the window."Don't look!" cried Mr. Lorry.  "Don't look out!  Manette,for your life, don't touch the blind!"The Doctor turned, with his hand upon the fastening of the window,and said, with a cool, bold smile:"My dear friend, I have a charmed life in this city.  I have been aBastille prisoner.  There is no patriot in Paris--in Paris?  InFrance--who, knowing me to have been a prisoner in the Bastille,would touch me, except to overwhelm me with embraces, or carry me intriumph.  My old pain has given me a power that has brought usthrough the barrier, and gained us news of Charles there, and broughtus here.  I knew it would be so; I knew I could help Charles out ofall danger; I told Lucie so.--What is that noise?"  His hand was againupon the window."Don't look!" cried Mr. Lorry, absolutely desperate.  "No, Lucie, mydear, nor you!"  He got his arm round her, and held her.  "Don't be soterrified, my love.  I solemnly swear to you that I know of no harmhaving happened to Charles; that I had no suspicion even of his beingin this fatal place.  What prison is he in?""La Force!""La Force!  Lucie, my child, if ever you were brave and serviceable inyour life--and you were always both--you will compose yourself now,to do exactly as I bid you; for more depends upon it than you can think,or I can say.  There is no help for you in any action on your partto-night; you cannot possibly stir out.  I say this, because what Imust bid you to do for Charles's sake, is the hardest thing to do of all.You must instantly be obedient, still, and quiet.  You must let meput you in a room at the back here.  You must leave your father andme alone for two minutes, and as there are Life and Death in theworld you must not delay.""I will be submissive to you.  I see in your face that you know I cando nothing else than this.  I know you are true."The old man kissed her, and hurried her into his room, and turned thekey; then, came hurrying back to the Doctor, and opened the windowand partly opened the blind, and put his hand upon the Doctor's arm,and looked out with him into the courtyard.Looked out upon a throng of men and women:  not enough in number, ornear enough, to fill the courtyard:  not more than forty or fifty inall.  The people in possession of the house had let them in at thegate, and they had rushed in to work at the grindstone; it hadevidently been set up there for their purpose, as in a convenient andretired spot.But, such awful workers, and such awful work!The grindstone had a double handle, and, turning at it madly were twomen, whose faces, as their long hair flapped back when the whirlingsof the grindstone brought their faces up, were more horrible andcruel than the visages of the wildest savages in their most barbarousdisguise.  False eyebrows and false moustaches were stuck upon them,and their hideous countenances were all bloody and sweaty, and allawry with howling, and all staring and glaring with beastlyexcitement and want of sleep.  As these ruffians turned and turned,their matted locks now flung forward over their eyes, now flungbackward over their necks, some women held wine to their mouths thatthey might drink; and what with dropping blood, and what withdropping wine, and what with the stream of sparks struck out of thestone, all their wicked atmosphere seemed gore and fire.  The eyecould not detect one creature in the group free from the smear of blood.Shouldering one another to get next at the sharpening-stone, were menstripped to the waist, with the stain all over their limbs andbodies; men in all sorts of rags, with the stain upon those rags; mendevilishly set off with spoils of women's lace and silk and ribbon,with the stain dyeing those trifles through and through.  Hatchets,knives, bayonets, swords, all brought to be sharpened, were all redwith it.  Some of the hacked swords were tied to the wrists of thosewho carried them, with strips of linen and fragments of dress:ligatures various in kind, but all deep of the one colour.  And asthe frantic wielders of these weapons snatched them from the streamof sparks and tore away into the streets, the same red hue was red intheir frenzied eyes;--eyes which any unbrutalised beholder would havegiven twenty years of life, to petrify with a well-directed gun.All this was seen in a moment, as the vision of a drowning man, or ofany human creature at any very great pass, could see a world if itwere there.  They drew back from the window, and the Doctor lookedfor explanation in his friend's ashy face."They are," Mr. Lorry whispered the words, glancing fearfully roundat the locked room, "murdering the prisoners.  If you are sure ofwhat you say; if you really have the power you think you have--as Ibelieve you have--make yourself known to these devils, and get takento La Force.  It may be too late, I don't know, but let it not be aminute later!"Doctor Manette pressed his hand, hastened bareheaded out of the room,and was in the courtyard when Mr. Lorry regained the blind.His streaming white hair, his remarkable face, and the impetuousconfidence of his manner, as he put the weapons aside like water,carried him in an instant to the heart of the concourse at the stone.For a few moments there was a pause, and a hurry, and a murmur, andthe unintelligible sound of his voice; and then Mr. Lorry saw him,surrounded by all, and in the midst of a line of twenty men long, alllinked shoulder to shoulder, and hand to shoulder, hurried out withcries of--"Live the Bastille prisoner!  Help for the Bastilleprisoner's kindred in La Force!  Room for the Bastille prisoner infront there!  Save the prisoner Evremonde at La Force!" and a thousandanswering shouts.He closed the lattice again with a fluttering heart, closed thewindow and the curtain, hastened to Lucie, and told her that herfather was assisted by the people, and gone in search of her husband.He found her child and Miss Pross with her; but, it never occurred tohim to be surprised by their appearance until a long time afterwards,when he sat watching them in such quiet as the night knew.Lucie had, by that time, fallen into a stupor on the floor at his feet,clinging to his hand.  Miss Pross had laid the child down on his own bed,and her head had gradually fallen on the pillow beside her pretty charge.O the long, long night, with the moans of the poor wife!  And O the long,long night, with no return of her father and no tidings!Twice more in the darkness the bell at the great gate sounded,and the irruption was repeated, and the grindstone whirled andspluttered.  "What is it?" cried Lucie, affrighted.  "Hush!  Thesoldiers' swords are sharpened there," said Mr. Lorry.  "The placeis national property now, and used as a kind of armoury, my love."Twice more in all; but, the last spell of work was feeble and fitful.Soon afterwards the day began to dawn, and he softly detached himselffrom the clasping hand, and cautiously looked out again.  A man, sobesmeared that he might have been a sorely wounded soldier creepingback to consciousness on a field of slain, was rising from thepavement by the side of the grindstone, and looking about him with avacant air.  Shortly, this worn-out murderer descried in the imperfectlight one of the carriages of Monseigneur, and, staggering to thatgorgeous vehicle, climbed in at the door, and shut himself up to takehis rest on its dainty cushions.The great grindstone, Earth, had turned when Mr. Lorry looked out again,and the sun was red on the courtyard.  But, the lesser grindstonestood alone there in the calm morning air, with a red upon it thatthe sun had never given, and would never take away.IIIThe ShadowOne of the first considerations which arose in the business mind ofMr. Lorry when business hours came round, was this:--that he had noright to imperil Tellson's by sheltering the wife of an emigrantprisoner under the Bank roof.  His own possessions, safety, life,he would have hazarded for Lucie and her child, without a moment'sdemur; but the great trust he held was not his own, and as to thatbusiness charge he was a strict man of business.At first, his mind reverted to Defarge, and he thought of finding outthe wine-shop again and taking counsel with its master in referenceto the safest dwelling-place in the distracted state of the city.But, the same consideration that suggested him, repudiated him; helived in the most violent Quarter, and doubtless was influentialthere, and deep in its dangerous workings.Noon coming, and the Doctor not returning, and every minute's delaytending to compromise Tellson's, Mr. Lorry advised with Lucie.She said that her father had spoken of hiring a lodging for a shortterm, in that Quarter, near the Banking-house.  As there was nobusiness objection to this, and as he foresaw that even if it wereall well with Charles, and he were to be released, he could not hopeto leave the city, Mr. Lorry went out in quest of such a lodging, andfound a suitable one, high up in a removed by-street where the closedblinds in all the other windows of a high melancholy square of buildingsmarked deserted homes.To this lodging he at once removed Lucie and her child, and MissPross:  giving them what comfort he could, and much more than he hadhimself.  He left Jerry with them, as a figure to fill a doorway thatwould bear considerable knocking on the head, and retained to his ownoccupations.  A disturbed and doleful mind he brought to bear upon them,and slowly and heavily the day lagged on with him.It wore itself out, and wore him out with it, until the Bank closed.He was again alone in his room of the previous night, consideringwhat to do next, when he heard a foot upon the stair.  In a fewmoments, a man stood in his presence, who, with a keenly observantlook at him, addressed him by his name."Your servant," said Mr. Lorry.  "Do you know me?"He was a strongly made man with dark curling hair, from forty-five tofifty years of age.  For answer he repeated, without any change ofemphasis, the words:"Do you know me?""I have seen you somewhere.""Perhaps at my wine-shop?"Much interested and agitated, Mr. Lorry said:  "You come from DoctorManette?""Yes.  I come from Doctor Manette.""And what says he?  What does he send me?"Defarge gave into his anxious hand, an open scrap of paper.  It borethe words in the Doctor's writing:    "Charles is safe, but I cannot safely leave this place yet.     I have obtained the favour that the bearer has a short note     from Charles to his wife.  Let the bearer see his wife."It was dated from La Force, within an hour."Will you accompany me," said Mr. Lorry, joyfully relieved afterreading this note aloud, "to where his wife resides?""Yes," returned Defarge.Scarcely noticing as yet, in what a curiously reserved and mechanicalway Defarge spoke, Mr. Lorry put on his hat and they went down intothe courtyard.  There, they found two women; one, knitting."Madame Defarge, surely!" said Mr. Lorry, who had left her in exactlythe same attitude some seventeen years ago."It is she," observed her husband."Does Madame go with us?" inquired Mr. Lorry, seeing that she movedas they moved."Yes.  That she may be able to recognise the faces and know the persons.It is for their safety."Beginning to be struck by Defarge's manner, Mr. Lorry lookeddubiously at him, and led the way.  Both the women followed; thesecond woman being The Vengeance.They passed through the intervening streets as quickly as they might,ascended the staircase of the new domicile, were admitted by Jerry,and found Lucie weeping, alone.  She was thrown into a transport bythe tidings Mr. Lorry gave her of her husband, and clasped the handthat delivered his note--little thinking what it had been doing nearhim in the night, and might, but for a chance, have done to him.     "DEAREST,--Take courage.  I am well, and your father has      influence around me.  You cannot answer this.      Kiss our child for me."That was all the writing.  It was so much, however, to her whoreceived it, that she turned from Defarge to his wife, and kissed oneof the hands that knitted.  It was a passionate, loving, thankful,womanly action, but the hand made no response--dropped cold andheavy, and took to its knitting again.There was something in its touch that gave Lucie a check.She stopped in the act of putting the note in her bosom, and,with her hands yet at her neck, looked terrified at Madame Defarge.Madame Defarge met the lifted eyebrows and forehead with a cold,impassive stare."My dear," said Mr. Lorry, striking in to explain; "there arefrequent risings in the streets; and, although it is not likely theywill ever trouble you, Madame Defarge wishes to see those whom shehas the power to protect at such times, to the end that she may knowthem--that she may identify them.  I believe," said Mr. Lorry,rather halting in his reassuring words, as the stony manner of allthe three impressed itself upon him more and more, "I state the case,Citizen Defarge?"Defarge looked gloomily at his wife, and gave no other answer than agruff sound of acquiescence."You had better, Lucie," said Mr. Lorry, doing all he could topropitiate, by tone and manner, "have the dear child here, and ourgood Pross.  Our good Pross, Defarge, is an English lady, and knowsno French."The lady in question, whose rooted conviction that she was more thana match for any foreigner, was not to be shaken by distress and,danger, appeared with folded arms, and observed in English to TheVengeance, whom her eyes first encountered, "Well, I am sure, Boldface!I hope _you_ are pretty well!"  She also bestowed a British cough onMadame Defarge; but, neither of the two took much heed of her."Is that his child?" said Madame Defarge, stopping in her work forthe first time, and pointing her knitting-needle at little Lucie asif it were the finger of Fate."Yes, madame," answered Mr. Lorry; "this is our poor prisoner'sdarling daughter, and only child."The shadow attendant on Madame Defarge and her party seemed to fallso threatening and dark on the child, that her mother instinctivelykneeled on the ground beside her, and held her to her breast.  Theshadow attendant on Madame Defarge and her party seemed then to fall,threatening and dark, on both the mother and the child."It is enough, my husband," said Madame Defarge.  "I have seen them.We may go."But, the suppressed manner had enough of menace in it--not visibleand presented, but indistinct and withheld--to alarm Lucie intosaying, as she laid her appealing hand on Madame Defarge's dress:"You will be good to my poor husband.  You will do him no harm.You will help me to see him if you can?""Your husband is not my business here," returned Madame Defarge,looking down at her with perfect composure.  "It is the daughter ofyour father who is my business here.""For my sake, then, be merciful to my husband.  For my child's sake!She will put her hands together and pray you to be merciful.  We aremore afraid of you than of these others."Madame Defarge received it as a compliment, and looked at herhusband.  Defarge, who had been uneasily biting his thumb-nail andlooking at her, collected his face into a sterner expression."What is it that your husband says in that little letter?"  askedMadame Defarge, with a lowering smile.  "Influence; he says somethingtouching influence?""That my father," said Lucie, hurriedly taking the paper from herbreast, but with her alarmed eyes on her questioner and not on it,"has much influence around him.""Surely it will release him!" said Madame Defarge.  "Let it do so.""As a wife and mother," cried Lucie, most earnestly, "I implore youto have pity on me and not to exercise any power that you possess,against my innocent husband, but to use it in his behalf.O sister-woman, think of me.  As a wife and mother!"Madame Defarge looked, coldly as ever, at the suppliant, and said,turning to her friend The Vengeance:"The wives and mothers we have been used to see, since we were aslittle as this child, and much less, have not been greatlyconsidered?  We have known _their_ husbands and fathers laid in prisonand kept from them, often enough?  All our lives, we have seen oursister-women suffer, in themselves and in their children, poverty,nakedness, hunger, thirst, sickness, misery, oppression and neglectof all kinds?""We have seen nothing else," returned The Vengeance."We have borne this a long time," said Madame Defarge, turning hereyes again upon Lucie.  "Judge you!  Is it likely that the trouble ofone wife and mother would be much to us now?"She resumed her knitting and went out.  The Vengeance followed.Defarge went last, and closed the door."Courage, my dear Lucie," said Mr. Lorry, as he raised her."Courage, courage!  So far all goes well with us--much, much betterthan it has of late gone with many poor souls.  Cheer up, and have athankful heart.""I am not thankless, I hope, but that dreadful woman seems to throw ashadow on me and on all my hopes.""Tut, tut!" said Mr. Lorry; "what is this despondency in the bravelittle breast?  A shadow indeed!  No substance in it, Lucie."But the shadow of the manner of these Defarges was dark upon himself,for all that, and in his secret mind it troubled him greatly.IVCalm in StormDoctor Manette did not return until the morning of the fourth day ofhis absence.  So much of what had happened in that dreadful time ascould be kept from the knowledge of Lucie was so well concealed fromher, that not until long afterwards, when France and she were far apart,did she know that eleven hundred defenceless prisoners of both sexesand all ages had been killed by the populace; that four days andnights had been darkened by this deed of horror; and that the airaround her had been tainted by the slain.  She only knew that therehad been an attack upon the prisons, that all political prisoners hadbeen in danger, and that some had been dragged out by the crowd andmurdered.To Mr. Lorry, the Doctor communicated under an injunction of secrecyon which he had no need to dwell, that the crowd had taken himthrough a scene of carnage to the prison of La Force.  That, in theprison he had found a self-appointed Tribunal sitting, before whichthe prisoners were brought singly, and by which they were rapidlyordered to be put forth to be massacred, or to be released, or (in afew cases) to be sent back to their cells.  That, presented by hisconductors to this Tribunal, he had announced himself by name andprofession as having been for eighteen years a secret and unaccusedprisoner in the Bastille; that, one of the body so sitting injudgment had risen and identified him, and that this man was Defarge.That, hereupon he had ascertained, through the registers on the table,that his son-in-law was among the living prisoners, and had pleadedhard to the Tribunal--of whom some members were asleep and some awake,some dirty with murder and some clean, some sober and some not--forhis life and liberty.  That, in the first frantic greetings lavishedon himself as a notable sufferer under the overthrown system, it hadbeen accorded to him to have Charles Darnay brought before the lawlessCourt, and examined.  That, he seemed on the point of being at oncereleased, when the tide in his favour met with some unexplained check(not intelligible to the Doctor), which led to a few words of secretconference.  That, the man sitting as President had then informedDoctor Manette that the prisoner must remain in custody, but should,for his sake, be held inviolate in safe custody.  That, immediately,on a signal, the prisoner was removed to the interior of the prisonagain; but, that he, the Doctor, had then so strongly pleaded forpermission to remain and assure himself that his son-in-law was,through no malice or mischance, delivered to the concourse whosemurderous yells outside the gate had often drowned the proceedings,that he had obtained the permission, and had remained in that Hall ofBlood until the danger was over.The sights he had seen there, with brief snatches of food and sleepby intervals, shall remain untold.  The mad joy over the prisonerswho were saved, had astounded him scarcely less than the mad ferocityagainst those who were cut to pieces.  One prisoner there was, hesaid, who had been discharged into the street free, but at whom amistaken savage had thrust a pike as he passed out.  Being besoughtto go to him and dress the wound, the Doctor had passed out at thesame gate, and had found him in the arms of a company of Samaritans,who were seated on the bodies of their victims.  With an inconsistencyas monstrous as anything in this awful nightmare, they had helped thehealer, and tended the wounded man with the gentlest solicitude--had made a litter for him and escorted him carefully from the spot--had then caught up their weapons and plunged anew into a butchery sodreadful, that the Doctor had covered his eyes with his hands, andswooned away in the midst of it.As Mr. Lorry received these confidences, and as he watched the faceof his friend now sixty-two years of age, a misgiving arose withinhim that such dread experiences would revive the old danger.But, he had never seen his friend in his present aspect:  he had neverat all known him in his present character.  For the first time theDoctor felt, now, that his suffering was strength and power.  For thefirst time he felt that in that sharp fire, he had slowly forged theiron which could break the prison door of his daughter's husband, anddeliver him.  "It all tended to a good end, my friend; it was notmere waste and ruin.  As my beloved child was helpful in restoring meto myself, I will be helpful now in restoring the dearest part ofherself to her; by the aid of Heaven I will do it!"  Thus, DoctorManette.  And when Jarvis Lorry saw the kindled eyes, the resoluteface, the calm strong look and bearing of the man whose life alwaysseemed to him to have been stopped, like a clock, for so many years,and then set going again with an energy which had lain dormant duringthe cessation of its usefulness, he believed.Greater things than the Doctor had at that time to contend with,would have yielded before his persevering purpose.  While he kepthimself in his place, as a physician, whose business was with alldegrees of mankind, bond and free, rich and poor, bad and good, heused his personal influence so wisely, that he was soon the inspectingphysician of three prisons, and among them of La Force.  He could nowassure Lucie that her husband was no longer confined alone, but wasmixed with the general body of prisoners; he saw her husband weekly,and brought sweet messages to her, straight from his lips; sometimesher husband himself sent a letter to her (though never by the Doctor'shand), but she was not permitted to write to him:  for, among the manywild suspicions of plots in the prisons, the wildest of all pointedat emigrants who were known to have made friends or permanentconnections abroad.This new life of the Doctor's was an anxious life, no doubt; still,the sagacious Mr. Lorry saw that there was a new sustaining pride in it.Nothing unbecoming tinged the pride; it was a natural and worthy one;but he observed it as a curiosity.  The Doctor knew, that up to thattime, his imprisonment had been associated in the minds of hisdaughter and his friend, with his personal affliction, deprivation,and weakness.  Now that this was changed, and he knew himself to beinvested through that old trial with forces to which they both lookedfor Charles's ultimate safety and deliverance, he became so far exaltedby the change, that he took the lead and direction, and required themas the weak, to trust to him as the strong.  The preceding relativepositions of himself and Lucie were reversed, yet only as theliveliest gratitude and affection could reverse them, for he couldhave had no pride but in rendering some service to her who hadrendered so much to him.  "All curious to see," thought Mr. Lorry,in his amiably shrewd way, "but all natural and right; so, take thelead, my dear friend, and keep it; it couldn't be in better hands."But, though the Doctor tried hard, and never ceased trying, to getCharles Darnay set at liberty, or at least to get him brought to trial,the public current of the time set too strong and fast for him.The new era began; the king was tried, doomed, and beheaded; theRepublic of Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death, declared forvictory or death against the world in arms; the black flag wavednight and day from the great towers of Notre Dame; three hundredthousand men, summoned to rise against the tyrants of the earth, rosefrom all the varying soils of France, as if the dragon's teeth hadbeen sown broadcast, and had yielded fruit equally on hill and plain,on rock, in gravel, and alluvial mud, under the bright sky of theSouth and under the clouds of the North, in fell and forest, in thevineyards and the olive-grounds and among the cropped grass and thestubble of the corn, along the fruitful banks of the broad rivers,and in the sand of the sea-shore.  What private solicitude could rearitself against the deluge of the Year One of Liberty--the delugerising from below, not falling from above, and with the windows ofHeaven shut, not opened!There was no pause, no pity, no peace, no interval of relenting rest,no measurement of time.  Though days and nights circled as regularlyas when time was young, and the evening and morning were the firstday, other count of time there was none.  Hold of it was lost in theraging fever of a nation, as it is in the fever of one patient.Now, breaking the unnatural silence of a whole city, the executionershowed the people the head of the king--and now, it seemed almost inthe same breath, the head of his fair wife which had had eight wearymonths of imprisoned widowhood and misery, to turn it grey.And yet, observing the strange law of contradiction which obtains inall such cases, the time was long, while it flamed by so fast.A revolutionary tribunal in the capital, and forty or fifty thousandrevolutionary committees all over the land; a law of the Suspected,which struck away all security for liberty or life, and deliveredover any good and innocent person to any bad and guilty one; prisonsgorged with people who had committed no offence, and could obtain nohearing; these things became the established order and nature ofappointed things, and seemed to be ancient usage before they weremany weeks old.  Above all, one hideous figure grew as familiar as ifit had been before the general gaze from the foundations of theworld--the figure of the sharp female called La Guillotine.It was the popular theme for jests; it was the best cure forheadache, it infallibly prevented the hair from turning grey, itimparted a peculiar delicacy to the complexion, it was the NationalRazor which shaved close:  who kissed La Guillotine, looked throughthe little window and sneezed into the sack.  It was the sign of theregeneration of the human race.  It superseded the Cross.  Models ofit were worn on breasts from which the Cross was discarded, and itwas bowed down to and believed in where the Cross was denied.It sheared off heads so many, that it, and the ground it mostpolluted, were a rotten red.  It was taken to pieces, like atoy-puzzle for a young Devil, and was put together again when theoccasion wanted it.  It hushed the eloquent, struck down the powerful,abolished the beautiful and good.  Twenty-two friends of high publicmark, twenty-one living and one dead, it had lopped the heads off,in one morning, in as many minutes.  The name of the strong man ofOld Scripture had descended to the chief functionary who worked it;but, so armed, he was stronger than his namesake, and blinder, andtore away the gates of God's own Temple every day.Among these terrors, and the brood belonging to them, the Doctorwalked with a steady head:  confident in his power, cautiouslypersistent in his end, never doubting that he would save Lucie'shusband at last.  Yet the current of the time swept by, so strong anddeep, and carried the time away so fiercely, that Charles had lain inprison one year and three months when the Doctor was thus steady andconfident.  So much more wicked and distracted had the Revolutiongrown in that December month, that the rivers of the South wereencumbered with the bodies of the violently drowned by night, andprisoners were shot in lines and squares under the southern wintry sun.Still, the Doctor walked among the terrors with a steady head.No man better known than he, in Paris at that day; no man in astranger situation.  Silent, humane, indispensable in hospital andprison, using his art equally among assassins and victims, he was aman apart.  In the exercise of his skill, the appearance and thestory of the Bastille Captive removed him from all other men.  He wasnot suspected or brought in question, any more than if he had indeedbeen recalled to life some eighteen years before, or were a Spiritmoving among mortals.VThe Wood-SawyerOne year and three months.  During all that time Lucie was neversure, from hour to hour, but that the Guillotine would strike off herhusband's head next day.  Every day, through the stony streets, thetumbrils now jolted heavily, filled with Condemned.  Lovely girls;bright women, brown-haired, black-haired, and grey; youths; stalwartmen and old; gentle born and peasant born; all red wine for LaGuillotine, all daily brought into light from the dark cellars of theloathsome prisons, and carried to her through the streets to slakeher devouring thirst.  Liberty, equality, fraternity, or death;--thelast, much the easiest to bestow, O Guillotine!If the suddenness of her calamity, and the whirling wheels of thetime, had stunned the Doctor's daughter into awaiting the result inidle despair, it would but have been with her as it was with many.But, from the hour when she had taken the white head to her freshyoung bosom in the garret of Saint Antoine, she had been true to herduties.  She was truest to them in the season of trial, as all thequietly loyal and good will always be.As soon as they were established in their new residence, and herfather had entered on the routine of his avocations, she arranged thelittle household as exactly as if her husband had been there.Everything had its appointed place and its appointed time.  LittleLucie she taught, as regularly, as if they had all been united intheir English home.  The slight devices with which she cheatedherself into the show of a belief that they would soon be reunited--the little preparations for his speedy return, the setting aside ofhis chair and his books--these, and the solemn prayer at night forone dear prisoner especially, among the many unhappy souls in prisonand the shadow of death--were almost the only outspoken reliefs ofher heavy mind.She did not greatly alter in appearance.  The plain dark dresses,akin to mourning dresses, which she and her child wore, were as neatand as well attended to as the brighter clothes of happy days.She lost her colour, and the old and intent expression was a constant,not an occasional, thing; otherwise, she remained very pretty andcomely.  Sometimes, at night on kissing her father, she would burstinto the grief she had repressed all day, and would say that her solereliance, under Heaven, was on him.  He always resolutely answered:"Nothing can happen to him without my knowledge, and I know that Ican save him, Lucie."They had not made the round of their changed life many weeks,when her father said to her, on coming home one evening:"My dear, there is an upper window in the prison, to which Charlescan sometimes gain access at three in the afternoon.  When he can getto it--which depends on many uncertainties and incidents--he mightsee you in the street, he thinks, if you stood in a certain placethat I can show you.  But you will not be able to see him, my poorchild, and even if you could, it would be unsafe for you to make asign of recognition.""O show me the place, my father, and I will go there every day."From that time, in all weathers, she waited there two hours.As the clock struck two, she was there, and at four she turnedresignedly away.  When it was not too wet or inclement for her childto be with her, they went together; at other times she was alone;but, she never missed a single day.It was the dark and dirty corner of a small winding street.The hovel of a cutter of wood into lengths for burning, was the onlyhouse at that end; all else was wall.  On the third day of her beingthere, he noticed her."Good day, citizeness.""Good day, citizen."This mode of address was now prescribed by decree.  It had beenestablished voluntarily some time ago, among the more thoroughpatriots; but, was now law for everybody."Walking here again, citizeness?""You see me, citizen!"The wood-sawyer, who was a little man with a redundancy of gesture(he had once been a mender of roads), cast a glance at the prison,pointed at the prison, and putting his ten fingers before his face torepresent bars, peeped through them jocosely."But it's not my business," said he.  And went on sawing his wood.Next day he was looking out for her, and accosted her the moment sheappeared."What?  Walking here again, citizeness?""Yes, citizen.""Ah!  A child too!  Your mother, is it not, my little citizeness?""Do I say yes, mamma?" whispered little Lucie, drawing close to her."Yes, dearest.""Yes, citizen.""Ah!  But it's not my business.  My work is my business.  See my saw!I call it my Little Guillotine.  La, la, la; La, la, la!  And off hishead comes!"The billet fell as he spoke, and he threw it into a basket."I call myself the Samson of the firewood guillotine.  See here again!Loo, loo, loo; Loo, loo, loo!  And off _her_ head comes!  Now, a child.Tickle, tickle; Pickle, pickle!  And off _its_ head comes.  All the family!"Lucie shuddered as he threw two more billets into his basket, but itwas impossible to be there while the wood-sawyer was at work, and notbe in his sight.  Thenceforth, to secure his good will, she alwaysspoke to him first, and often gave him drink-money, which he readilyreceived.He was an inquisitive fellow, and sometimes when she had quiteforgotten him in gazing at the prison roof and grates, and in liftingher heart up to her husband, she would come to herself to find himlooking at her, with his knee on his bench and his saw stopped in itswork.  "But it's not my business!" he would generally say at thosetimes, and would briskly fall to his sawing again.In all weathers, in the snow and frost of winter, in the bitter windsof spring, in the hot sunshine of summer, in the rains of autumn, andagain in the snow and frost of winter, Lucie passed two hours ofevery day at this place; and every day on leaving it, she kissed theprison wall.  Her husband saw her (so she learned from her father) itmight be once in five or six times:  it might be twice or thrice running:it might be, not for a week or a fortnight together.  It was enoughthat he could and did see her when the chances served, and on thatpossibility she would have waited out the day, seven days a week.These occupations brought her round to the December month, whereinher father walked among the terrors with a steady head.  On alightly-snowing afternoon she arrived at the usual corner.  It was aday of some wild rejoicing, and a festival.  She had seen the houses,as she came along, decorated with little pikes, and with little redcaps stuck upon them; also, with tricoloured ribbons; also, with thestandard inscription (tricoloured letters were the favourite),Republic One and Indivisible.  Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death!The miserable shop of the wood-sawyer was so small, that its wholesurface furnished very indifferent space for this legend.  He had gotsomebody to scrawl it up for him, however, who had squeezed Death inwith most inappropriate difficulty.  On his house-top, he displayedpike and cap, as a good citizen must, and in a window he hadstationed his saw inscribed as his "Little Sainte Guillotine"--for the great sharp female was by that time popularly canonised.His shop was shut and he was not there, which was a relief to Lucie,and left her quite alone.But, he was not far off, for presently she heard a troubled movementand a shouting coming along, which filled her with fear.  A momentafterwards, and a throng of people came pouring round the corner bythe prison wall, in the midst of whom was the wood-sawyer hand inhand with The Vengeance.  There could not be fewer than five hundredpeople, and they were dancing like five thousand demons.  There wasno other music than their own singing.  They danced to the popularRevolution song, keeping a ferocious time that was like a gnashing ofteeth in unison.  Men and women danced together, women dancedtogether, men danced together, as hazard had brought them together.At first, they were a mere storm of coarse red caps and coarsewoollen rags; but, as they filled the place, and stopped to danceabout Lucie, some ghastly apparition of a dance-figure gone ravingmad arose among them.  They advanced, retreated, struck at oneanother's hands, clutched at one another's heads, spun round alone,caught one another and spun round in pairs, until many of themdropped.  While those were down, the rest linked hand in hand, andall spun round together:  then the ring broke, and in separate ringsof two and four they turned and turned until they all stopped atonce, began again, struck, clutched, and tore, and then reversed thespin, and all spun round another way.  Suddenly they stopped again,paused, struck out the time afresh, formed into lines the width ofthe public way, and, with their heads low down and their hands highup, swooped screaming off.  No fight could have been half so terribleas this dance.  It was so emphatically a fallen sport--a something,once innocent, delivered over to all devilry--a healthy pastimechanged into a means of angering the blood, bewildering the senses,and steeling the heart.  Such grace as was visible in it, made it theuglier, showing how warped and perverted all things good by naturewere become.  The maidenly bosom bared to this, the prettyalmost-child's head thus distracted, the delicate foot mincing inthis slough of blood and dirt, were types of the disjointed time.This was the Carmagnole.  As it passed, leaving Lucie frightened andbewildered in the doorway of the wood-sawyer's house, the featherysnow fell as quietly and lay as white and soft, as if it had never been."O my father!" for he stood before her when she lifted up the eyesshe had momentarily darkened with her hand; "such a cruel, bad sight.""I know, my dear, I know.  I have seen it many times.  Don't befrightened!  Not one of them would harm you.""I am not frightened for myself, my father.  But when I think of myhusband, and the mercies of these people--""We will set him above their mercies very soon.  I left him climbingto the window, and I came to tell you.  There is no one here to see.You may kiss your hand towards that highest shelving roof.""I do so, father, and I send him my Soul with it!""You cannot see him, my poor dear?""No, father," said Lucie, yearning and weeping as she kissed her hand,"no."A footstep in the snow.  Madame Defarge.  "I salute you, citizeness,"from the Doctor.  "I salute you, citizen."  This in passing.  Nothingmore.  Madame Defarge gone, like a shadow over the white road."Give me your arm, my love.  Pass from here with an air of cheerfulnessand courage, for his sake.  That was well done;" they had left the spot;"it shall not be in vain.  Charles is summoned for to-morrow.""For to-morrow!""There is no time to lose.  I am well prepared, but there areprecautions to be taken, that could not be taken until he was actuallysummoned before the Tribunal.  He has not received the notice yet,but I know that he will presently be summoned for to-morrow, andremoved to the Conciergerie; I have timely information.You are not afraid?"She could scarcely answer, "I trust in you.""Do so, implicitly.  Your suspense is nearly ended, my darling; heshall be restored to you within a few hours; I have encompassed himwith every protection.  I must see Lorry."He stopped.  There was a heavy lumbering of wheels within hearing.They both knew too well what it meant.  One.  Two.  Three.  Threetumbrils faring away with their dread loads over the hushing snow."I must see Lorry," the Doctor repeated, turning her another way.The staunch old gentleman was still in his trust; had never left it.He and his books were in frequent requisition as to propertyconfiscated and made national.  What he could save for the owners, hesaved.  No better man living to hold fast by what Tellson's had inkeeping, and to hold his peace.A murky red and yellow sky, and a rising mist from the Seine, denotedthe approach of darkness.  It was almost dark when they arrived atthe Bank.  The stately residence of Monseigneur was altogetherblighted and deserted.  Above a heap of dust and ashes in the court,ran the letters:  National Property.  Republic One and Indivisible.Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, or Death!Who could that be with Mr. Lorry--the owner of the riding-coat uponthe chair--who must not be seen?  From whom newly arrived, did he comeout, agitated and surprised, to take his favourite in his arms?  Towhom did he appear to repeat her faltering words, when, raising hisvoice and turning his head towards the door of the room from which hehad issued, he said:  "Removed to the Conciergerie, and summoned forto-morrow?"VITriumphThe dread tribunal of five Judges, Public Prosecutor, and determinedJury, sat every day.  Their lists went forth every evening, and wereread out by the gaolers of the various prisons to their prisoners.The standard gaoler-joke was, "Come out and listen to the Evening Paper,you inside there!""Charles Evremonde, called Darnay!"So at last began the Evening Paper at La Force.When a name was called, its owner stepped apart into a spot reservedfor those who were announced as being thus fatally recorded.  CharlesEvremonde, called Darnay, had reason to know the usage; he had seenhundreds pass away so.His bloated gaoler, who wore spectacles to read with, glanced overthem to assure himself that he had taken his place, and went throughthe list, making a similar short pause at each name.  There weretwenty-three names, but only twenty were responded to; for one of theprisoners so summoned had died in gaol and been forgotten, and twohad already been guillotined and forgotten.  The list was read, inthe vaulted chamber where Darnay had seen the associated prisoners onthe night of his arrival.  Every one of those had perished in themassacre; every human creature he had since cared for and parted with,had died on the scaffold.There were hurried words of farewell and kindness, but the partingwas soon over.  It was the incident of every day, and the society ofLa Force were engaged in the preparation of some games of forfeitsand a little concert, for that evening.  They crowded to the gratesand shed tears there; but, twenty places in the projectedentertainments had to be refilled, and the time was, at best, shortto the lock-up hour, when the common rooms and corridors would bedelivered over to the great dogs who kept watch there through thenight.  The prisoners were far from insensible or unfeeling; theirways arose out of the condition of the time.  Similarly, though witha subtle difference, a species of fervour or intoxication, known,without doubt, to have led some persons to brave the guillotineunnecessarily, and to die by it, was not mere boastfulness, but awild infection of the wildly shaken public mind.  In seasons ofpestilence, some of us will have a secret attraction to the disease--a terrible passing inclination to die of it.  And all of us have likewonders hidden in our breasts, only needing circumstances to evoke them.The passage to the Conciergerie was short and dark; the night in itsvermin-haunted cells was long and cold.  Next day, fifteen prisonerswere put to the bar before Charles Darnay's name was called.  All thefifteen were condemned, and the trials of the whole occupied an hourand a half."Charles Evremonde, called Darnay," was at length arraigned.His judges sat upon the Bench in feathered hats; but the rough redcap and tricoloured cockade was the head-dress otherwise prevailing.Looking at the Jury and the turbulent audience, he might have thoughtthat the usual order of things was reversed, and that the felons weretrying the honest men.  The lowest, cruelest, and worst populace of acity, never without its quantity of low, cruel, and bad, were thedirecting spirits of the scene:  noisily commenting, applauding,disapproving, anticipating, and precipitating the result, without acheck.  Of the men, the greater part were armed in various ways; ofthe women, some wore knives, some daggers, some ate and drank as theylooked on, many knitted.  Among these last, was one, with a sparepiece of knitting under her arm as she worked.  She was in a frontrow, by the side of a man whom he had never seen since his arrival atthe Barrier, but whom he directly remembered as Defarge.  He noticedthat she once or twice whispered in his ear, and that she seemed tobe his wife; but, what he most noticed in the two figures was, thatalthough they were posted as close to himself as they could be, theynever looked towards him.  They seemed to be waiting for somethingwith a dogged determination, and they looked at the Jury, but atnothing else.  Under the President sat Doctor Manette, in his usualquiet dress.  As well as the prisoner could see, he and Mr. Lorrywere the only men there, unconnected with the Tribunal, who wore theirusual clothes, and had not assumed the coarse garb of the Carmagnole.Charles Evremonde, called Darnay, was accused by the publicprosecutor as an emigrant, whose life was forfeit to the Republic,under the decree which banished all emigrants on pain of Death.It was nothing that the decree bore date since his return to France.There he was, and there was the decree; he had been taken in France,and his head was demanded."Take off his head!" cried the audience.  "An enemy to the Republic!"The President rang his bell to silence those cries, and asked theprisoner whether it was not true that he had lived many years in England?Undoubtedly it was.Was he not an emigrant then?  What did he call himself?Not an emigrant, he hoped, within the sense and spirit of the law.Why not?  the President desired to know.Because he had voluntarily relinquished a title that was distastefulto him, and a station that was distasteful to him, and had left hiscountry--he submitted before the word emigrant in the presentacceptation by the Tribunal was in use--to live by his own industryin England, rather than on the industry of the overladen people ofFrance.What proof had he of this?He handed in the names of two witnesses; Theophile Gabelle, andAlexandre Manette.But he had married in England?  the President reminded him.True, but not an English woman.A citizeness of France?Yes.  By birth.Her name and family?"Lucie Manette, only daughter of Doctor Manette, the good physicianwho sits there."This answer had a happy effect upon the audience.  Cries inexaltation of the well-known good physician rent the hall.  Socapriciously were the people moved, that tears immediately rolleddown several ferocious countenances which had been glaring at theprisoner a moment before, as if with impatience to pluck him out intothe streets and kill him.On these few steps of his dangerous way, Charles Darnay had set hisfoot according to Doctor Manette's reiterated instructions.  The samecautious counsel directed every step that lay before him, and hadprepared every inch of his road.The President asked, why had he returned to France when he did,and not sooner?He had not returned sooner, he replied, simply because he had nomeans of living in France, save those he had resigned; whereas, inEngland, he lived by giving instruction in the French language andliterature.  He had returned when he did, on the pressing and writtenentreaty of a French citizen, who represented that his life wasendangered by his absence.  He had come back, to save a citizen's life,and to bear his testimony, at whatever personal hazard, to the truth.Was that criminal in the eyes of the Republic?The populace cried enthusiastically, "No!" and the President rang hisbell to quiet them.  Which it did not, for they continued to cry"No!" until they left off, of their own will.The President required the name of that citizen.  The accusedexplained that the citizen was his first witness.  He also referredwith confidence to the citizen's letter, which had been taken fromhim at the Barrier, but which he did not doubt would be found amongthe papers then before the President.The Doctor had taken care that it should be there--had assured himthat it would be there--and at this stage of the proceedings it wasproduced and read.  Citizen Gabelle was called to confirm it, and didso.  Citizen Gabelle hinted, with infinite delicacy and politeness,that in the pressure of business imposed on the Tribunal by themultitude of enemies of the Republic with which it had to deal, hehad been slightly overlooked in his prison of the Abbaye--in fact,had rather passed out of the Tribunal's patriotic remembrance--untilthree days ago; when he had been summoned before it, and had been setat liberty on the Jury's declaring themselves satisfied that theaccusation against him was answered, as to himself, by the surrenderof the citizen Evremonde, called Darnay.Doctor Manette was next questioned.  His high personal popularity,and the clearness of his answers, made a great impression; but, as heproceeded, as he showed that the Accused was his first friend on hisrelease from his long imprisonment; that, the accused had remained inEngland, always faithful and devoted to his daughter and himself intheir exile; that, so far from being in favour with the Aristocratgovernment there, he had actually been tried for his life by it, asthe foe of England and friend of the United States--as he broughtthese circumstances into view, with the greatest discretion and withthe straightforward force of truth and earnestness, the Jury and thepopulace became one.  At last, when he appealed by name to MonsieurLorry, an English gentleman then and there present, who, like himself,had been a witness on that English trial and could corroborate hisaccount of it, the Jury declared that they had heard enough, and thatthey were ready with their votes if the President were content toreceive them.At every vote (the Jurymen voted aloud and individually), thepopulace set up a shout of applause.  All the voices were in theprisoner's favour, and the President declared him free.Then, began one of those extraordinary scenes with which the populacesometimes gratified their fickleness, or their better impulsestowards generosity and mercy, or which they regarded as some set-offagainst their swollen account of cruel rage.  No man can decide nowto which of these motives such extraordinary scenes were referable;it is probable, to a blending of all the three, with the secondpredominating.  No sooner was the acquittal pronounced, than tearswere shed as freely as blood at another time, and such fraternalembraces were bestowed upon the prisoner by as many of both sexes ascould rush at him, that after his long and unwholesome confinement hewas in danger of fainting from exhaustion; none the less because heknew very well, that the very same people, carried by another current,would have rushed at him with the very same intensity, to rend him topieces and strew him over the streets.His removal, to make way for other accused persons who were to betried, rescued him from these caresses for the moment.  Five were tobe tried together, next, as enemies of the Republic, forasmuch asthey had not assisted it by word or deed.  So quick was the Tribunalto compensate itself and the nation for a chance lost, that thesefive came down to him before he left the place, condemned to diewithin twenty-four hours.  The first of them told him so, with thecustomary prison sign of Death--a raised finger--and they all addedin words, "Long live the Republic!"The five had had, it is true, no audience to lengthen theirproceedings, for when he and Doctor Manette emerged from the gate,there was a great crowd about it, in which there seemed to be everyface he had seen in Court--except two, for which he looked in vain.On his coming out, the concourse made at him anew, weeping,embracing, and shouting, all by turns and all together, until thevery tide of the river on the bank of which the mad scene was acted,seemed to run mad, like the people on the shore.They put him into a great chair they had among them, and which theyhad taken either out of the Court itself, or one of its rooms orpassages.  Over the chair they had thrown a red flag, and to the backof it they had bound a pike with a red cap on its top.  In this carof triumph, not even the Doctor's entreaties could prevent his beingcarried to his home on men's shoulders, with a confused sea of redcaps heaving about him, and casting up to sight from the stormy deepsuch wrecks of faces, that he more than once misdoubted his mindbeing in confusion, and that he was in the tumbril on his way to theGuillotine.In wild dreamlike procession, embracing whom they met and pointinghim out, they carried him on.  Reddening the snowy streets with theprevailing Republican colour, in winding and tramping through them,as they had reddened them below the snow with a deeper dye, theycarried him thus into the courtyard of the building where he lived.Her father had gone on before, to prepare her, and when her husbandstood upon his feet, she dropped insensible in his arms.As he held her to his heart and turned her beautiful head between hisface and the brawling crowd, so that his tears and her lips mightcome together unseen, a few of the people fell to dancing.  Instantly,all the rest fell to dancing, and the courtyard overflowed with theCarmagnole.  Then, they elevated into the vacant chair a young womanfrom the crowd to be carried as the Goddess of Liberty, and thenswelling and overflowing out into the adjacent streets, and along theriver's bank, and over the bridge, the Carmagnole absorbed them everyone and whirled them away.After grasping the Doctor's hand, as he stood victorious and proudbefore him; after grasping the hand of Mr. Lorry, who came panting inbreathless from his struggle against the waterspout of the Carmagnole;after kissing little Lucie, who was lifted up to clasp her arms roundhis neck; and after embracing the ever zealous and faithful Pross wholifted her; he took his wife in his arms, and carried her up to theirrooms."Lucie!  My own!  I am safe.""O dearest Charles, let me thank God for this on my knees as I haveprayed to Him."They all reverently bowed their heads and hearts.  When she was againin his arms, he said to her:"And now speak to your father, dearest.  No other man in all thisFrance could have done what he has done for me."She laid her head upon her father's breast, as she had laid his poorhead on her own breast, long, long ago.  He was happy in the returnhe had made her, he was recompensed for his suffering, he was proudof his strength.  "You must not be weak, my darling," he remonstrated;"don't tremble so.  I have saved him."VIIA Knock at the Door"I have saved him."  It was not another of the dreams in which he hadoften come back; he was really here.  And yet his wife trembled, anda vague but heavy fear was upon her.All the air round was so thick and dark, the people were sopassionately revengeful and fitful, the innocent were so constantlyput to death on vague suspicion and black malice, it was soimpossible to forget that many as blameless as her husband and asdear to others as he was to her, every day shared the fate from whichhe had been clutched, that her heart could not be as lightened of itsload as she felt it ought to be.  The shadows of the wintry afternoonwere beginning to fall, and even now the dreadful carts were rollingthrough the streets.  Her mind pursued them, looking for him amongthe Condemned; and then she clung closer to his real presence andtrembled more.Her father, cheering her, showed a compassionate superiority to thiswoman's weakness, which was wonderful to see.  No garret, no shoemaking,no One Hundred and Five, North Tower, now!  He had accomplished thetask he had set himself, his promise was redeemed, he had saved Charles.Let them all lean upon him.Their housekeeping was of a very frugal kind:  not only because thatwas the safest way of life, involving the least offence to thepeople, but because they were not rich, and Charles, throughout hisimprisonment, had had to pay heavily for his bad food, and for hisguard, and towards the living of the poorer prisoners.  Partly onthis account, and partly to avoid a domestic spy, they kept noservant; the citizen and citizeness who acted as porters at thecourtyard gate, rendered them occasional service; and Jerry (almostwholly transferred to them by Mr. Lorry) had become their dailyretainer, and had his bed there every night.It was an ordinance of the Republic One and Indivisible of Liberty,Equality, Fraternity, or Death, that on the door or doorpost of everyhouse, the name of every inmate must be legibly inscribed in lettersof a certain size, at a certain convenient height from the ground.Mr. Jerry Cruncher's name, therefore, duly embellished the doorpostdown below; and, as the afternoon shadows deepened, the owner of thatname himself appeared, from overlooking a painter whom Doctor Manettehad employed to add to the list the name of Charles Evremonde, calledDarnay.In the universal fear and distrust that darkened the time, all theusual harmless ways of life were changed.  In the Doctor's littlehousehold, as in very many others, the articles of daily consumptionthat were wanted were purchased every evening, in small quantitiesand at various small shops.  To avoid attracting notice, and to giveas little occasion as possible for talk and envy, was the general desire.For some months past, Miss Pross and Mr. Cruncher had discharged theoffice of purveyors; the former carrying the money; the latter, thebasket.  Every afternoon at about the time when the public lamps werelighted, they fared forth on this duty, and made and brought homesuch purchases as were needful.  Although Miss Pross, through herlong association with a French family, might have known as much oftheir language as of her own, if she had had a mind, she had no mindin that direction; consequently she knew no more of that "nonsense"(as she was pleased to call it) than Mr. Cruncher did.  So hermanner of marketing was to plump a noun-substantive at the head of ashopkeeper without any introduction in the nature of an article, and,if it happened not to be the name of the thing she wanted, to lookround for that thing, lay hold of it, and hold on by it until thebargain was concluded.  She always made a bargain for it, by holdingup, as a statement of its just price, one finger less than the merchantheld up, whatever his number might be."Now, Mr. Cruncher," said Miss Pross, whose eyes were red withfelicity; "if you are ready, I am."Jerry hoarsely professed himself at Miss Pross's service.  He had wornall his rust off long ago, but nothing would file his spiky head down."There's all manner of things wanted," said Miss Pross, "and we shallhave a precious time of it.  We want wine, among the rest.Nice toasts these Redheads will be drinking, wherever we buy it.""It will be much the same to your knowledge, miss, I should think,"retorted Jerry, "whether they drink your health or the Old Un's.""Who's he?" said Miss Pross.Mr. Cruncher, with some diffidence, explained himself as meaning "OldNick's.""Ha!" said Miss Pross, "it doesn't need an interpreter to explain themeaning of these creatures.  They have but one, and it's MidnightMurder, and Mischief.""Hush, dear!  Pray, pray, be cautious!" cried Lucie."Yes, yes, yes, I'll be cautious," said Miss Pross; "but I may sayamong ourselves, that I do hope there will be no oniony and tobaccoeysmotherings in the form of embracings all round, going on in thestreets.  Now, Ladybird, never you stir from that fire till I comeback!  Take care of the dear husband you have recovered, and don'tmove your pretty head from his shoulder as you have it now, till yousee me again!  May I ask a question, Doctor Manette, before I go?""I think you may take that liberty," the Doctor answered, smiling."For gracious sake, don't talk about Liberty; we have quite enough ofthat," said Miss Pross."Hush, dear!  Again?" Lucie remonstrated."Well, my sweet," said Miss Pross, nodding her head emphatically,"the short and the long of it is, that I am a subject of His MostGracious Majesty King George the Third;" Miss Pross curtseyed at thename; "and as such, my maxim is, Confound their politics, Frustratetheir knavish tricks, On him our hopes we fix, God save the King!"Mr. Cruncher, in an access of loyalty, growlingly repeated the wordsafter Miss Pross, like somebody at church."I am glad you have so much of the Englishman in you, though I wishyou had never taken that cold in your voice," said Miss Pross,approvingly.  "But the question, Doctor Manette.  Is there"--it wasthe good creature's way to affect to make light of anything that wasa great anxiety with them all, and to come at it in this chancemanner--"is there any prospect yet, of our getting out of this place?""I fear not yet.  It would be dangerous for Charles yet.""Heigh-ho-hum!" said Miss Pross, cheerfully repressing a sigh as sheglanced at her darling's golden hair in the light of the fire,"then we must have patience and wait:  that's all.  We must hold upour heads and fight low, as my brother Solomon used to say.Now, Mr. Cruncher!--Don't you move, Ladybird!"They went out, leaving Lucie, and her husband, her father, and thechild, by a bright fire.  Mr. Lorry was expected back presently fromthe Banking House.  Miss Pross had lighted the lamp, but had put itaside in a corner, that they might enjoy the fire-light undisturbed.Little Lucie sat by her grandfather with her hands clasped throughhis arm:  and he, in a tone not rising much above a whisper, began totell her a story of a great and powerful Fairy who had opened aprison-wall and let out a captive who had once done the Fairy aservice.  All was subdued and quiet, and Lucie was more at ease thanshe had been."What is that?" she cried, all at once."My dear!" said her father, stopping in his story, and laying hishand on hers, "command yourself.  What a disordered state you are in!The least thing--nothing--startles you!  _You_, your father's daughter!""I thought, my father," said Lucie, excusing herself, with a pale faceand in a faltering voice, "that I heard strange feet upon the stairs.""My love, the staircase is as still as Death."As he said the word, a blow was struck upon the door."Oh father, father.  What can this be!  Hide Charles.  Save him!""My child," said the Doctor, rising, and laying his hand upon hershoulder, "I _have_ saved him.  What weakness is this, my dear!Let me go to the door."He took the lamp in his hand, crossed the two intervening outerrooms, and opened it.  A rude clattering of feet over the floor,and four rough men in red caps, armed with sabres and pistols,entered the room."The Citizen Evremonde, called Darnay," said the first."Who seeks him?" answered Darnay."I seek him.  We seek him.  I know you, Evremonde; I saw you beforethe Tribunal to-day.  You are again the prisoner of the Republic."The four surrounded him, where he stood with his wife and childclinging to him."Tell me how and why am I again a prisoner?""It is enough that you return straight to the Conciergerie, and willknow to-morrow.  You are summoned for to-morrow."Doctor Manette, whom this visitation had so turned into stone, thathe stood with the lamp in his hand, as if be woe a statue made tohold it, moved after these words were spoken, put the lamp down, andconfronting the speaker, and taking him, not ungently, by the loosefront of his red woollen shirt, said:"You know him, you have said.  Do you know me?""Yes, I know you, Citizen Doctor.""We all know you, Citizen Doctor," said the other three.He looked abstractedly from one to another, and said, in a lowervoice, after a pause:"Will you answer his question to me then?  How does this happen?""Citizen Doctor," said the first, reluctantly, "he has been denouncedto the Section of Saint Antoine.  This citizen," pointing out thesecond who had entered, "is from Saint Antoine."The citizen here indicated nodded his head, and added:"He is accused by Saint Antoine.""Of what?" asked the Doctor."Citizen Doctor," said the first, with his former reluctance, "ask nomore.  If the Republic demands sacrifices from you, without doubt youas a good patriot will be happy to make them.  The Republic goesbefore all.  The People is supreme.  Evremonde, we are pressed.""One word," the Doctor entreated.  "Will you tell me who denounced him?""It is against rule," answered the first; "but you can ask Him ofSaint Antoine here."The Doctor turned his eyes upon that man.  Who moved uneasily on hisfeet, rubbed his beard a little, and at length said:"Well!  Truly it is against rule.  But he is denounced--andgravely--by the Citizen and Citizeness Defarge.  And by one other.""What other?""Do _you_ ask, Citizen Doctor?""Yes.""Then," said he of Saint Antoine, with a strange look, "you will beanswered to-morrow.  Now, I am dumb!"VIIIA Hand at CardsHappily unconscious of the new calamity at home, Miss Pross threadedher way along the narrow streets and crossed the river by the bridgeof the Pont-Neuf, reckoning in her mind the number of indispensablepurchases she had to make.  Mr. Cruncher, with the basket, walked ather side.  They both looked to the right and to the left into most ofthe shops they passed, had a wary eye for all gregarious assemblagesof people, and turned out of their road to avoid any very excitedgroup of talkers.  It was a raw evening, and the misty river, blurredto the eye with blazing lights and to the ear with harsh noises,showed where the barges were stationed in which the smiths worked,making guns for the Army of the Republic.  Woe to the man who playedtricks with _that_ Army, or got undeserved promotion in it!  Betterfor him that his beard had never grown, for the National Razor shavedhim close.Having purchased a few small articles of grocery, and a measure ofoil for the lamp, Miss Pross bethought herself of the wine theywanted.  After peeping into several wine-shops, she stopped at thesign of the Good Republican Brutus of Antiquity, not far from theNational Palace, once (and twice) the Tuileries, where the aspect ofthings rather took her fancy.  It had a quieter look than any otherplace of the same description they had passed, and, though red withpatriotic caps, was not so red as the rest.  Sounding Mr. Cruncher,and finding him of her opinion, Miss Pross resorted to the GoodRepublican Brutus of Antiquity, attended by her cavalier.Slightly observant of the smoky lights; of the people, pipe in mouth,playing with limp cards and yellow dominoes; of the one bare-breasted, bare-armed, soot-begrimed workman reading a journal aloud,and of the others listening to him; of the weapons worn, or laidaside to be resumed; of the two or three customers fallen forwardasleep, who in the popular high-shouldered shaggy black spencerlooked, in that attitude, like slumbering bears or dogs; the twooutlandish customers approached the counter, and showed what they wanted.As their wine was measuring out, a man parted from another man in acorner, and rose to depart.  In going, he had to face Miss Pross.No sooner did he face her, than Miss Pross uttered a scream, andclapped her hands.In a moment, the whole company were on their feet.  That somebody wasassassinated by somebody vindicating a difference of opinion was thelikeliest occurrence.  Everybody looked to see somebody fall, butonly saw a man and a woman standing staring at each other; the manwith all the outward aspect of a Frenchman and a thorough Republican;the woman, evidently English.What was said in this disappointing anti-climax, by the disciples ofthe Good Republican Brutus of Antiquity, except that it was somethingvery voluble and loud, would have been as so much Hebrew or Chaldeanto Miss Pross and her protector, though they had been all ears.  But,they had no ears for anything in their surprise.  For, it must berecorded, that not only was Miss Pross lost in amazement andagitation, but, Mr. Cruncher--though it seemed on his own separateand individual account--was in a state of the greatest wonder."What is the matter?" said the man who had caused Miss Pross to scream;speaking in a vexed, abrupt voice (though in a low tone), and inEnglish."Oh, Solomon, dear Solomon!" cried Miss Pross, clapping her handsagain.  "After not setting eyes upon you or hearing of you for solong a time, do I find you here!""Don't call me Solomon.  Do you want to be the death of me?" askedthe man, in a furtive, frightened way."Brother, brother!" cried Miss Pross, bursting into tears.  "Have Iever been so hard with you that you ask me such a cruel question?""Then hold your meddlesome tongue," said Solomon, "and come out, ifyou want to speak to me.  Pay for your wine, and come out.Who's this man?"Miss Pross, shaking her loving and dejected head at her by no meansaffectionate brother, said through her tears, "Mr. Cruncher.""Let him come out too," said Solomon.  "Does he think me a ghost?"Apparently, Mr. Cruncher did, to judge from his looks.  He said not aword, however, and Miss Pross, exploring the depths of her reticulethrough her tears with great difficulty paid for her wine.  As shedid so, Solomon turned to the followers of the Good Republican Brutusof Antiquity, and offered a few words of explanation in the Frenchlanguage, which caused them all to relapse into their former placesand pursuits."Now," said Solomon, stopping at the dark street corner,"what do you want?""How dreadfully unkind in a brother nothing has ever turned my loveaway from!" cried Miss Pross, "to give me such a greeting, and showme no affection.""There.  Confound it!  There," said Solomon, making a dab at MissPross's lips with his own.  "Now are you content?"Miss Pross only shook her head and wept in silence."If you expect me to be surprised," said her brother Solomon, "I amnot surprised; I knew you were here; I know of most people who arehere.  If you really don't want to endanger my existence--which I halfbelieve you do--go your ways as soon as possible, and let me go mine.I am busy.  I am an official.""My English brother Solomon," mourned Miss Pross, casting up hertear-fraught eyes, "that had the makings in him of one of the bestand greatest of men in his native country, an official amongforeigners, and such foreigners!  I would almost sooner have seen thedear boy lying in his--""I said so!" cried her brother, interrupting.  "I knew it.  You wantto be the death of me.  I shall be rendered Suspected, by my ownsister.  Just as I am getting on!""The gracious and merciful Heavens forbid!" cried Miss Pross.  "Farrather would I never see you again, dear Solomon, though I have everloved you truly, and ever shall.  Say but one affectionate word tome, and tell me there is nothing angry or estranged between us, and Iwill detain you no longer."Good Miss Pross!  As if the estrangement between them had come of anyculpability of hers.  As if Mr. Lorry had not known it for a fact,years ago, in the quiet corner in Soho, that this precious brotherhad spent her money and left her!He was saying the affectionate word, however, with a far moregrudging condescension and patronage than he could have shown iftheir relative merits and positions had been reversed (which isinvariably the case, all the world over), when Mr. Cruncher, touchinghim on the shoulder, hoarsely and unexpectedly interposed with thefollowing singular question:"I say!  Might I ask the favour?  As to whether your name is JohnSolomon, or Solomon John?"The official turned towards him with sudden distrust.  He had notpreviously uttered a word."Come!" said Mr. Cruncher.  "Speak out, you know."  (Which, by theway, was more than he could do himself.)  "John Solomon, or SolomonJohn?  She calls you Solomon, and she must know, being your sister.And _I_ know you're John, you know.  Which of the two goes first?And regarding that name of Pross, likewise.  That warn't your nameover the water.""What do you mean?""Well, I don't know all I mean, for I can't call to mind what yourname was, over the water.""No?""No.  But I'll swear it was a name of two syllables.""Indeed?""Yes.  T'other one's was one syllable.  I know you.  You was a spy--witness at the Bailey.  What, in the name of the Father of Lies,own father to yourself, was you called at that time?""Barsad," said another voice, striking in."That's the name for a thousand pound!" cried Jerry.The speaker who struck in, was Sydney Carton.  He had his handsbehind him under the skirts of his riding-coat, and he stood atMr. Cruncher's elbow as negligently as he might have stood at the OldBailey itself."Don't be alarmed, my dear Miss Pross.  I arrived at Mr. Lorry's,to his surprise, yesterday evening; we agreed that I would notpresent myself elsewhere until all was well, or unless I could beuseful; I present myself here, to beg a little talk with your brother.I wish you had a better employed brother than Mr. Barsad.  I wishfor your sake Mr. Barsad was not a Sheep of the Prisons."Sheep was a cant word of the time for a spy, under the gaolers.The spy, who was pale, turned paler, and asked him how he dared--"I'll tell you," said Sydney.  "I lighted on you, Mr. Barsad, comingout of the prison of the Conciergerie while I was contemplating thewalls, an hour or more ago.  You have a face to be remembered, and Iremember faces well.  Made curious by seeing you in that connection,and having a reason, to which you are no stranger, for associatingyou with the misfortunes of a friend now very unfortunate, I walkedin your direction.  I walked into the wine-shop here, close after you,and sat near you.  I had no difficulty in deducing from your unreservedconversation, and the rumour openly going about among your admirers,the nature of your calling.  And gradually, what I had done at random,seemed to shape itself into a purpose, Mr. Barsad.""What purpose?" the spy asked."It would be troublesome, and might be dangerous, to explain in thestreet.  Could you favour me, in confidence, with some minutes ofyour company--at the office of Tellson's Bank, for instance?""Under a threat?""Oh!  Did I say that?""Then, why should I go there?""Really, Mr. Barsad, I can't say, if you can't.""Do you mean that you won't say, sir?" the spy irresolutely asked."You apprehend me very clearly, Mr. Barsad.  I won't."Carton's negligent recklessness of manner came powerfully in aid ofhis quickness and skill, in such a business as he had in his secretmind, and with such a man as he had to do with.  His practised eyesaw it, and made the most of it."Now, I told you so," said the spy, casting a reproachful look at hissister; "if any trouble comes of this, it's your doing.""Come, come, Mr. Barsad!" exclaimed Sydney.  "Don't beungrateful.  But for my great respect for your sister, I might nothave led up so pleasantly to a little proposal that I wish to makefor our mutual satisfaction.  Do you go with me to the Bank?""I'll hear what you have got to say.  Yes, I'll go with you.""I propose that we first conduct your sister safely to the corner ofher own street.  Let me take your arm, Miss Pross.  This is not agood city, at this time, for you to be out in, unprotected; and asyour escort knows Mr. Barsad, I will invite him to Mr. Lorry's with us.Are we ready?  Come then!"Miss Pross recalled soon afterwards, and to the end of her liferemembered, that as she pressed her hands on Sydney's arm and lookedup in his face, imploring him to do no hurt to Solomon, there was abraced purpose in the arm and a kind of inspiration in the eyes,which not only contradicted his light manner, but changed and raisedthe man.  She was too much occupied then with fears for the brotherwho so little deserved her affection, and with Sydney's friendlyreassurances, adequately to heed what she observed.They left her at the corner of the street, and Carton led the way toMr. Lorry's, which was within a few minutes' walk.  John Barsad, orSolomon Pross, walked at his side.Mr. Lorry had just finished his dinner, and was sitting before acheery little log or two of fire--perhaps looking into their blazefor the picture of that younger elderly gentleman from Tellson's, whohad looked into the red coals at the Royal George at Dover, now agood many years ago.  He turned his head as they entered, and showedthe surprise with which he saw a stranger."Miss Pross's brother, sir," said Sydney.  "Mr. Barsad.""Barsad?" repeated the old gentleman, "Barsad?  I have an associationwith the name--and with the face.""I told you you had a remarkable face, Mr. Barsad," observed Carton,coolly.  "Pray sit down."As he took a chair himself, he supplied the link that Mr. Lorrywanted, by saying to him with a frown, "Witness at that trial."Mr. Lorry immediately remembered, and regarded his new visitor withan undisguised look of abhorrence."Mr. Barsad has been recognised by Miss Pross as the affectionatebrother you have heard of," said Sydney, "and has acknowledged therelationship.  I pass to worse news.  Darnay has been arrested again."Struck with consternation, the old gentleman exclaimed, "What do youtell me!  I left him safe and free within these two hours, and amabout to return to him!""Arrested for all that.  When was it done, Mr. Barsad?""Just now, if at all.""Mr. Barsad is the best authority possible, sir," said Sydney, "and Ihave it from Mr. Barsad's communication to a friend and brother Sheepover a bottle of wine, that the arrest has taken place.  He left themessengers at the gate, and saw them admitted by the porter.There is no earthly doubt that he is retaken."Mr. Lorry's business eye read in the speaker's face that it was lossof time to dwell upon the point.  Confused, but sensible thatsomething might depend on his presence of mind, he commanded himself,and was silently attentive."Now, I trust," said Sydney to him, "that the name and influence ofDoctor Manette may stand him in as good stead to-morrow--you said hewould be before the Tribunal again to-morrow, Mr. Barsad?--""Yes; I believe so.""--In as good stead to-morrow as to-day.  But it may not be so.I own to you, I am shaken, Mr. Lorry, by Doctor Manette's not havinghad the power to prevent this arrest.""He may not have known of it beforehand," said Mr. Lorry."But that very circumstance would be alarming, when we remember howidentified he is with his son-in-law.""That's true," Mr. Lorry acknowledged, with his troubled hand at hischin, and his troubled eyes on Carton."In short," said Sydney, "this is a desperate time, when desperategames are played for desperate stakes.  Let the Doctor play thewinning game; I will play the losing one.  No man's life here isworth purchase.  Any one carried home by the people to-day, may becondemned tomorrow.  Now, the stake I have resolved to play for, incase of the worst, is a friend in the Conciergerie.  And the friend Ipurpose to myself to win, is Mr. Barsad.""You need have good cards, sir," said the spy."I'll run them over.  I'll see what I hold,--Mr. Lorry, you knowwhat a brute I am; I wish you'd give me a little brandy."It was put before him, and he drank off a glassful--drank off anotherglassful--pushed the bottle thoughtfully away."Mr. Barsad," he went on, in the tone of one who really was lookingover a hand at cards:  "Sheep of the prisons, emissary of Republicancommittees, now turnkey, now prisoner, always spy and secretinformer, so much the more valuable here for being English that anEnglishman is less open to suspicion of subornation in thosecharacters than a Frenchman, represents himself to his employersunder a false name.  That's a very good card.  Mr. Barsad, now in theemploy of the republican French government, was formerly in theemploy of the aristocratic English government, the enemy of Franceand freedom.  That's an excellent card.  Inference clear as day inthis region of suspicion, that Mr. Barsad, still in the pay of thearistocratic English government, is the spy of Pitt, the treacherousfoe of the Republic crouching in its bosom, the English traitor andagent of all mischief so much spoken of and so difficult to find.That's a card not to be beaten.  Have you followed my hand, Mr. Barsad?""Not to understand your play," returned the spy, somewhat uneasily."I play my Ace, Denunciation of Mr. Barsad to the nearest SectionCommittee.  Look over your hand, Mr. Barsad, and see what you have.Don't hurry."He drew the bottle near, poured out another glassful of brandy,and drank it off.  He saw that the spy was fearful of his drinkinghimself into a fit state for the immediate denunciation of him.Seeing it, he poured out and drank another glassful."Look over your hand carefully, Mr. Barsad.  Take time."It was a poorer hand than he suspected.  Mr. Barsad saw losing cardsin it that Sydney Carton knew nothing of.  Thrown out of hishonourable employment in England, through too much unsuccessful hardswearing there--not because he was not wanted there; our Englishreasons for vaunting our superiority to secrecy and spies are of verymodern date--he knew that he had crossed the Channel, and acceptedservice in France:  first, as a tempter and an eavesdropper among hisown countrymen there:  gradually, as a tempter and an eavesdropperamong the natives.  He knew that under the overthrown government hehad been a spy upon Saint Antoine and Defarge's wine-shop; hadreceived from the watchful police such heads of informationconcerning Doctor Manette's imprisonment, release, and history, asshould serve him for an introduction to familiar conversation withthe Defarges; and tried them on Madame Defarge, and had broken downwith them signally.  He always remembered with fear and trembling,that that terrible woman had knitted when he talked with her, and hadlooked ominously at him as her fingers moved.  He had since seen her,in the Section of Saint Antoine, over and over again produce herknitted registers, and denounce people whose lives the guillotinethen surely swallowed up.  He knew, as every one employed as he wasdid, that he was never safe; that flight was impossible; that he wastied fast under the shadow of the axe; and that in spite of hisutmost tergiversation and treachery in furtherance of the reigningterror, a word might bring it down upon him.  Once denounced, and onsuch grave grounds as had just now been suggested to his mind, heforesaw that the dreadful woman of whose unrelenting character he hadseen many proofs, would produce against him that fatal register, andwould quash his last chance of life.  Besides that all secret men aremen soon terrified, here were surely cards enough of one black suit,to justify the holder in growing rather livid as he turned them over."You scarcely seem to like your hand," said Sydney, with the greatestcomposure.  "Do you play?""I think, sir," said the spy, in the meanest manner, as he turned toMr. Lorry, "I may appeal to a gentleman of your years and benevolence,to put it to this other gentleman, so much your junior, whether hecan under any circumstances reconcile it to his station to play thatAce of which he has spoken.  I admit that _I_ am a spy, and that itis considered a discreditable station--though it must be filled bysomebody; but this gentleman is no spy, and why should he so demeanhimself as to make himself one?""I play my Ace, Mr. Barsad," said Carton, taking the answer on himself,and looking at his watch, "without any scruple, in a very few minutes.""I should have hoped, gentlemen both," said the spy, always strivingto hook Mr. Lorry into the discussion, "that your respect for mysister--""I could not better testify my respect for your sister than byfinally relieving her of her brother," said Sydney Carton."You think not, sir?""I have thoroughly made up my mind about it."The smooth manner of the spy, curiously in dissonance with hisostentatiously rough dress, and probably with his usual demeanour,received such a check from the inscrutability of Carton,--who was amystery to wiser and honester men than he,--that it faltered here andfailed him.  While he was at a loss, Carton said, resuming his formerair of contemplating cards:"And indeed, now I think again, I have a strong impression that Ihave another good card here, not yet enumerated.  That friend andfellow-Sheep, who spoke of himself as pasturing in the country prisons;who was he?""French.  You don't know him," said the spy, quickly."French, eh?" repeated Carton, musing, and not appearing to noticehim at all, though he echoed his word.  "Well; he may be.""Is, I assure you," said the spy; "though it's not important.""Though it's not important," repeated Carton, in the same mechanicalway--"though it's not important--No, it's not important.  No.  Yet Iknow the face.""I think not.  I am sure not.  It can't be," said the spy."It-can't-be," muttered Sydney Carton, retrospectively, and idlinghis glass (which fortunately was a small one) again.  "Can't-be.Spoke good French.  Yet like a foreigner, I thought?""Provincial," said the spy."No.  Foreign!" cried Carton, striking his open hand on the table, asa light broke clearly on his mind.  "Cly!  Disguised, but the same man.We had that man before us at the Old Bailey.""Now, there you are hasty, sir," said Barsad, with a smile that gavehis aquiline nose an extra inclination to one side; "there you reallygive me an advantage over you.  Cly (who I will unreservedly admit,at this distance of time, was a partner of mine) has been deadseveral years.  I attended him in his last illness.  He was buried inLondon, at the church of Saint Pancras-in-the-Fields.  His unpopularitywith the blackguard multitude at the moment prevented my followinghis remains, but I helped to lay him in his coffin."Here, Mr. Lorry became aware, from where he sat, of a most remarkablegoblin shadow on the wall.  Tracing it to its source, he discoveredit to be caused by a sudden extraordinary rising and stiffening ofall the risen and stiff hair on Mr. Cruncher's head."Let us be reasonable," said the spy, "and let us be fair.  To showyou how mistaken you are, and what an unfounded assumption yours is,I will lay before you a certificate of Cly's burial, which I happenedto have carried in my pocket-book," with a hurried hand he producedand opened it, "ever since.  There it is.  Oh, look at it, look at it!You may take it in your hand; it's no forgery."Here, Mr. Lorry perceived the reflection on the wall to elongate, andMr. Cruncher rose and stepped forward.  His hair could not have beenmore violently on end, if it had been that moment dressed by the Cowwith the crumpled horn in the house that Jack built.Unseen by the spy, Mr. Cruncher stood at his side, and touched him onthe shoulder like a ghostly bailiff."That there Roger Cly, master," said Mr. Cruncher, with a taciturnand iron-bound visage.  "So _you_ put him in his coffin?""I did.""Who took him out of it?"Barsad leaned back in his chair, and stammered, "What do you mean?""I mean," said Mr. Cruncher, "that he warn't never in it.  No!  Not he!I'll have my head took off, if he was ever in it."The spy looked round at the two gentlemen; they both looked inunspeakable astonishment at Jerry."I tell you," said Jerry, "that you buried paving-stones and earth inthat there coffin.  Don't go and tell me that you buried Cly.  It wasa take in.  Me and two more knows it.""How do you know it?""What's that to you?  Ecod!" growled Mr. Cruncher, "it's you I have gota old grudge again, is it, with your shameful impositions upon tradesmen!I'd catch hold of your throat and choke you for half a guinea."Sydney Carton, who, with Mr. Lorry, had been lost in amazement atthis turn of the business, here requested Mr. Cruncher to moderateand explain himself."At another time, sir," he returned, evasively, "the present time isill-conwenient for explainin'.  What I stand to, is, that he knowswell wot that there Cly was never in that there coffin.  Let him sayhe was, in so much as a word of one syllable, and I'll either catchhold of his throat and choke him for half a guinea;" Mr. Cruncherdwelt upon this as quite a liberal offer; "or I'll out and announce him.""Humph!  I see one thing," said Carton.  "I hold another card,Mr. Barsad.  Impossible, here in raging Paris, with Suspicion fillingthe air, for you to outlive denunciation, when you are in communicationwith another aristocratic spy of the same antecedents as yourself,who, moreover, has the mystery about him of having feigned death andcome to life again!  A plot in the prisons, of the foreigner againstthe Republic.  A strong card--a certain Guillotine card!  Do you play?""No!" returned the spy.  "I throw up.  I confess that we were sounpopular with the outrageous mob, that I only got away from Englandat the risk of being ducked to death, and that Cly was so ferreted upand down, that he never would have got away at all but for that sham.Though how this man knows it was a sham, is a wonder of wonders to me.""Never you trouble your head about this man," retorted thecontentious Mr. Cruncher; "you'll have trouble enough with givingyour attention to that gentleman.  And look here!  Once more!"--Mr. Cruncher could not be restrained from making rather an ostentatiousparade of his liberality--"I'd catch hold of your throat and chokeyou for half a guinea."The Sheep of the prisons turned from him to Sydney Carton, and said,with more decision, "It has come to a point.  I go on duty soon, andcan't overstay my time.  You told me you had a proposal; what is it?Now, it is of no use asking too much of me.  Ask me to do anything inmy office, putting my head in great extra danger, and I had bettertrust my life to the chances of a refusal than the chances of consent.In short, I should make that choice.  You talk of desperation.We are all desperate here.  Remember!  I may denounce you if I thinkproper, and I can swear my way through stone walls, and so can others.Now, what do you want with me?""Not very much.  You are a turnkey at the Conciergerie?""I tell you once for all, there is no such thing as an escape possible,"said the spy, firmly."Why need you tell me what I have not asked?  You are a turnkey at theConciergerie?""I am sometimes.""You can be when you choose?""I can pass in and out when I choose."Sydney Carton filled another glass with brandy, poured it slowly outupon the hearth, and watched it as it dropped.  It being all spent,he said, rising:"So far, we have spoken before these two, because it was as well thatthe merits of the cards should not rest solely between you and me.Come into the dark room here, and let us have one final word alone."IXThe Game MadeWhile Sydney Carton and the Sheep of the prisons were in theadjoining dark room, speaking so low that not a sound was heard,Mr. Lorry looked at Jerry in considerable doubt and mistrust.  Thathonest tradesman's manner of receiving the look, did not inspireconfidence; he changed the leg on which he rested, as often as if hehad fifty of those limbs, and were trying them all; he examined hisfinger-nails with a very questionable closeness of attention; andwhenever Mr. Lorry's eye caught his, he was taken with that peculiarkind of short cough requiring the hollow of a hand before it, whichis seldom, if ever, known to be an infirmity attendant on perfectopenness of character."Jerry," said Mr. Lorry.  "Come here."Mr. Cruncher came forward sideways, with one of his shoulders inadvance of him."What have you been, besides a messenger?"After some cogitation, accompanied with an intent look at his patron,Mr. Cruncher conceived the luminous idea of replying, "Agicultooralcharacter.""My mind misgives me much," said Mr. Lorry, angrily shaking aforefinger at him, "that you have used the respectable and greathouse of Tellson's as a blind, and that you have had an unlawfuloccupation of an infamous description.  If you have, don't expect meto befriend you when you get back to England.  If you have, don'texpect me to keep your secret.  Tellson's shall not be imposed upon.""I hope, sir," pleaded the abashed Mr. Cruncher, "that a gentlemanlike yourself wot I've had the honour of odd jobbing till I'm grey atit, would think twice about harming of me, even if it wos so--I don'tsay it is, but even if it wos.  And which it is to be took intoaccount that if it wos, it wouldn't, even then, be all o' one side.There'd be two sides to it.  There might be medical doctors at thepresent hour, a picking up their guineas where a honest tradesmandon't pick up his fardens--fardens! no, nor yet his half fardens--half fardens! no, nor yet his quarter--a banking away like smoke atTellson's, and a cocking their medical eyes at that tradesman on thesly, a going in and going out to their own carriages--ah! equallylike smoke, if not more so.  Well, that 'ud be imposing, too, onTellson's.  For you cannot sarse the goose and not the gander.And here's Mrs. Cruncher, or leastways wos in the Old England times,and would be to-morrow, if cause given, a floppin' again the businessto that degree as is ruinating--stark ruinating!  Whereas them medicaldoctors' wives don't flop--catch 'em at it!  Or, if they flop, theirtoppings goes in favour of more patients, and how can you rightlyhave one without t'other?  Then, wot with undertakers, and wot withparish clerks, and wot with sextons, and wot with private watchmen(all awaricious and all in it), a man wouldn't get much by it, evenif it wos so.  And wot little a man did get, would never prosper withhim, Mr. Lorry.  He'd never have no good of it; he'd want all alongto be out of the line, if he, could see his way out, being once in--even if it wos so.""Ugh!" cried Mr. Lorry, rather relenting, nevertheless, "I am shockedat the sight of you.""Now, what I would humbly offer to you, sir," pursued Mr. Cruncher,"even if it wos so, which I don't say it is--""Don't prevaricate," said Mr. Lorry."No, I will _not_, sir," returned Mr. Crunches as if nothing werefurther from his thoughts or practice--"which I don't say it is--wotI would humbly offer to you, sir, would be this.  Upon that therestool, at that there Bar, sets that there boy of mine, brought up andgrowed up to be a man, wot will errand you, message you, general-light-job you, till your heels is where your head is, if such shouldbe your wishes.  If it wos so, which I still don't say it is (for Iwill not prewaricate to you, sir), let that there boy keep hisfather's place, and take care of his mother; don't blow upon thatboy's father--do not do it, sir--and let that father go into the lineof the reg'lar diggin', and make amends for what he would haveundug--if it wos so--by diggin' of 'em in with a will, and withconwictions respectin' the futur' keepin' of 'em safe.  That,Mr. Lorry," said Mr. Cruncher, wiping his forehead with his arm, asan announcement that he had arrived at the peroration of hisdiscourse, "is wot I would respectfully offer to you, sir.  A mandon't see all this here a goin' on dreadful round him, in the way ofSubjects without heads, dear me, plentiful enough fur to bring theprice down to porterage and hardly that, without havin' his seriousthoughts of things.  And these here would be mine, if it wos so,entreatin' of you fur to bear in mind that wot I said just now, I upand said in the good cause when I might have kep' it back.""That at least is true," said Mr. Lorry.  "Say no more now.  It may bethat I shall yet stand your friend, if you deserve it, and repent inaction--not in words.  I want no more words."Mr. Cruncher knuckled his forehead, as Sydney Carton and the spyreturned from the dark room.  "Adieu, Mr. Barsad," said the former;"our arrangement thus made, you have nothing to fear from me."He sat down in a chair on the hearth, over against Mr. Lorry.When they were alone, Mr. Lorry asked him what he had done?"Not much.  If it should go ill with the prisoner, I have ensuredaccess to him, once."Mr. Lorry's countenance fell."It is all I could do," said Carton.  "To propose too much, would beto put this man's head under the axe, and, as he himself said,nothing worse could happen to him if he were denounced.  It wasobviously the weakness of the position.  There is no help for it.""But access to him," said Mr. Lorry, "if it should go ill before theTribunal, will not save him.""I never said it would."Mr. Lorry's eyes gradually sought the fire; his sympathy with hisdarling, and the heavy disappointment of his second arrest, graduallyweakened them; he was an old man now, overborne with anxiety of late,and his tears fell."You are a good man and a true friend," said Carton, in an alteredvoice.  "Forgive me if I notice that you are affected.  I could notsee my father weep, and sit by, careless.  And I could not respectyour sorrow more, if you were my father.  You are free from thatmisfortune, however."Though he said the last words, with a slip into his usual manner,there was a true feeling and respect both in his tone and in histouch, that Mr. Lorry, who had never seen the better side of him,was wholly unprepared for.  He gave him his hand, and Carton gentlypressed it."To return to poor Darnay," said Carton.  "Don't tell Her of thisinterview, or this arrangement.  It would not enable Her to go to seehim.  She might think it was contrived, in case of the worse, toconvey to him the means of anticipating the sentence."Mr. Lorry had not thought of that, and he looked quickly at Carton tosee if it were in his mind.  It seemed to be; he returned the look,and evidently understood it."She might think a thousand things," Carton said, "and any of themwould only add to her trouble.  Don't speak of me to her.  As I saidto you when I first came, I had better not see her.  I can put myhand out, to do any little helpful work for her that my hand can findto do, without that.  You are going to her, I hope?  She must be verydesolate to-night.""I am going now, directly.""I am glad of that.  She has such a strong attachment to you andreliance on you.  How does she look?""Anxious and unhappy, but very beautiful.""Ah!"It was a long, grieving sound, like a sigh--almost like a sob.  Itattracted Mr. Lorry's eyes to Carton's face, which was turned to thefire.  A light, or a shade (the old gentleman could not have saidwhich), passed from it as swiftly as a change will sweep over ahill-side on a wild bright day, and he lifted his foot to put backone of the little flaming logs, which was tumbling forward.  He worethe white riding-coat and top-boots, then in vogue, and the light ofthe fire touching their light surfaces made him look very pale, withhis long brown hair, all untrimmed, hanging loose about him.  Hisindifference to fire was sufficiently remarkable to elicit a word ofremonstrance from Mr. Lorry; his boot was still upon the hot embersof the flaming log, when it had broken under the weight of his foot."I forgot it," he said.Mr. Lorry's eyes were again attracted to his face.  Taking note ofthe wasted air which clouded the naturally handsome features, andhaving the expression of prisoners' faces fresh in his mind, he wasstrongly reminded of that expression."And your duties here have drawn to an end, sir?" said Carton,turning to him."Yes.  As I was telling you last night when Lucie came in sounexpectedly, I have at length done all that I can do here.  I hopedto have left them in perfect safety, and then to have quitted Paris.I have my Leave to Pass.  I was ready to go."They were both silent."Yours is a long life to look back upon, sir?" said Carton, wistfully."I am in my seventy-eighth year.""You have been useful all your life; steadily and constantly occupied;trusted, respected, and looked up to?""I have been a man of business, ever since I have been a man.Indeed, I may say that I was a man of business when a boy.""See what a place you fill at seventy-eight.  How many people willmiss you when you leave it empty!""A solitary old bachelor," answered Mr. Lorry, shaking hishead.  "There is nobody to weep for me.""How can you say that?  Wouldn't She weep for you?  Wouldn't her child?""Yes, yes, thank God.  I didn't quite mean what I said.""It _is_ a thing to thank God for; is it not?""Surely, surely.""If you could say, with truth, to your own solitary heart, to-night,'I have secured to myself the love and attachment, the gratitude orrespect, of no human creature; I have won myself a tender place in noregard; I have done nothing good or serviceable to be remembered by!'your seventy-eight years would be seventy-eight heavy curses; wouldthey not?""You say truly, Mr. Carton; I think they would be."Sydney turned his eyes again upon the fire, and, after a silence of afew moments, said:"I should like to ask you:--Does your childhood seem far off?  Do thedays when you sat at your mother's knee, seem days of very long ago?"Responding to his softened manner, Mr. Lorry answered:"Twenty years back, yes; at this time of my life, no.  For, as I drawcloser and closer to the end, I travel in the circle, nearer andnearer to the beginning.  It seems to be one of the kind smoothingsand preparings of the way.  My heart is touched now, by manyremembrances that had long fallen asleep, of my pretty young mother(and I so old!), and by many associations of the days when what wecall the World was not so real with me, and my faults were notconfirmed in me.""I understand the feeling!" exclaimed Carton, with a bright flush."And you are the better for it?""I hope so."Carton terminated the conversation here, by rising to help him onwith his outer coat; "But you," said Mr. Lorry, reverting to the theme,"you are young.""Yes," said Carton.  "I am not old, but my young way was never theway to age.  Enough of me.""And of me, I am sure," said Mr. Lorry.  "Are you going out?""I'll walk with you to her gate.  You know my vagabond and restlesshabits.  If I should prowl about the streets a long time, don't beuneasy; I shall reappear in the morning.  You go to the Court to-morrow?""Yes, unhappily.""I shall be there, but only as one of the crowd.  My Spy will find aplace for me.  Take my arm, sir."Mr. Lorry did so, and they went down-stairs and out in the streets.A few minutes brought them to Mr. Lorry's destination.  Carton lefthim there; but lingered at a little distance, and turned back to thegate again when it was shut, and touched it.  He had heard of hergoing to the prison every day.  "She came out here," he said, lookingabout him, "turned this way, must have trod on these stones often.Let me follow in her steps."It was ten o'clock at night when he stood before the prison of LaForce, where she had stood hundreds of times.  A little wood-sawyer,having closed his shop, was smoking his pipe at his shop-door."Good night, citizen," said Sydney Carton, pausing in going by;for, the man eyed him inquisitively."Good night, citizen.""How goes the Republic?""You mean the Guillotine.  Not ill.  Sixty-three to-day.  We shallmount to a hundred soon.  Samson and his men complain sometimes, ofbeing exhausted.  Ha, ha, ha!  He is so droll, that Samson.Such a Barber!""Do you often go to see him--""Shave?  Always.  Every day.  What a barber!  You have seen him at work?""Never.""Go and see him when he has a good batch.  Figure this to yourself,citizen; he shaved the sixty-three to-day, in less than two pipes!Less than two pipes.  Word of honour!"As the grinning little man held out the pipe he was smoking, toexplain how he timed the executioner, Carton was so sensible of arising desire to strike the life out of him, that he turned away."But you are not English," said the wood-sawyer, "though you wearEnglish dress?""Yes," said Carton, pausing again, and answering over his shoulder."You speak like a Frenchman.""I am an old student here.""Aha, a perfect Frenchman!  Good night, Englishman.""Good night, citizen.""But go and see that droll dog," the little man persisted, callingafter him.  "And take a pipe with you!"Sydney had not gone far out of sight, when he stopped in the middleof the street under a glimmering lamp, and wrote with his pencil on ascrap of paper.  Then, traversing with the decided step of one whoremembered the way well, several dark and dirty streets--much dirtierthan usual, for the best public thoroughfares remained uncleansed inthose times of terror--he stopped at a chemist's shop, which theowner was closing with his own hands.  A small, dim, crooked shop,kept in a tortuous, up-hill thoroughfare, by a small, dim, crooked man.Giving this citizen, too, good night, as he confronted him at hiscounter, he laid the scrap of paper before him.  "Whew!" the chemistwhistled softly, as he read it.  "Hi! hi! hi!"Sydney Carton took no heed, and the chemist said:"For you, citizen?""For me.""You will be careful to keep them separate, citizen?  You know theconsequences of mixing them?""Perfectly."Certain small packets were made and given to him.  He put them, oneby one, in the breast of his inner coat, counted out the money forthem, and deliberately left the shop.  "There is nothing more to do,"said he, glancing upward at the moon, "until to-morrow.  I can't sleep."It was not a reckless manner, the manner in which he said these wordsaloud under the fast-sailing clouds, nor was it more expressive ofnegligence than defiance.  It was the settled manner of a tired man,who had wandered and struggled and got lost, but who at length struckinto his road and saw its end.Long ago, when he had been famous among his earliest competitors as ayouth of great promise, he had followed his father to the grave.His mother had died, years before.  These solemn words, which hadbeen read at his father's grave, arose in his mind as he went downthe dark streets, among the heavy shadows, with the moon and theclouds sailing on high above him.  "I am the resurrection and thelife, saith the Lord:  he that believeth in me, though he were dead,yet shall he live:  and whosoever liveth and believeth in me, shallnever die."In a city dominated by the axe, alone at night, with natural sorrowrising in him for the sixty-three who had been that day put to death,and for to-morrow's victims then awaiting their doom in the prisons,and still of to-morrow's and to-morrow's, the chain of associationthat brought the words home, like a rusty old ship's anchor from thedeep, might have been easily found.  He did not seek it, but repeatedthem and went on.With a solemn interest in the lighted windows where the people weregoing to rest, forgetful through a few calm hours of the horrorssurrounding them; in the towers of the churches, where no prayerswere said, for the popular revulsion had even travelled that lengthof self-destruction from years of priestly impostors, plunderers, andprofligates; in the distant burial-places, reserved, as they wroteupon the gates, for Eternal Sleep; in the abounding gaols; and in thestreets along which the sixties rolled to a death which had become socommon and material, that no sorrowful story of a haunting Spiritever arose among the people out of all the working of the Guillotine;with a solemn interest in the whole life and death of the citysettling down to its short nightly pause in fury; Sydney Cartoncrossed the Seine again for the lighter streets.Few coaches were abroad, for riders in coaches were liable to besuspected, and gentility hid its head in red nightcaps, and put onheavy shoes, and trudged.  But, the theatres were all well filled,and the people poured cheerfully out as he passed, and went chattinghome.  At one of the theatre doors, there was a little girl with amother, looking for a way across the street through the mud.He carried the child over, and before the timid arm was loosed fromhis neck asked her for a kiss."I am the resurrection and the life, saith the Lord:  he thatbelieveth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live:  andwhosoever liveth and believeth in me, shall never die."Now, that the streets were quiet, and the night wore on, the wordswere in the echoes of his feet, and were in the air.  Perfectly calmand steady, he sometimes repeated them to himself as he walked; but,he heard them always.The night wore out, and, as he stood upon the bridge listening to thewater as it splashed the river-walls of the Island of Paris, wherethe picturesque confusion of houses and cathedral shone bright in thelight of the moon, the day came coldly, looking like a dead face outof the sky.  Then, the night, with the moon and the stars, turned paleand died, and for a little while it seemed as if Creation weredelivered over to Death's dominion.But, the glorious sun, rising, seemed to strike those words, thatburden of the night, straight and warm to his heart in its longbright rays.  And looking along them, with reverently shaded eyes,a bridge of light appeared to span the air between him and the sun,while the river sparkled under it.The strong tide, so swift, so deep, and certain, was like a congenialfriend, in the morning stillness.  He walked by the stream, far fromthe houses, and in the light and warmth of the sun fell asleep on thebank.  When he awoke and was afoot again, he lingered there yet alittle longer, watching an eddy that turned and turned purposeless,until the stream absorbed it, and carried it on to the sea.--"Like me."A trading-boat, with a sail of the softened colour of a dead leaf,then glided into his view, floated by him, and died away.  As itssilent track in the water disappeared, the prayer that had broken upout of his heart for a merciful consideration of all his poorblindnesses and errors, ended in the words, "I am the resurrectionand the life."Mr. Lorry was already out when he got back, and it was easy tosurmise where the good old man was gone.  Sydney Carton drank nothingbut a little coffee, ate some bread, and, having washed and changedto refresh himself, went out to the place of trial.The court was all astir and a-buzz, when the black sheep--whom manyfell away from in dread--pressed him into an obscure corner among thecrowd.  Mr. Lorry was there, and Doctor Manette was there.  She wasthere, sitting beside her father.When her husband was brought in, she turned a look upon him, sosustaining, so encouraging, so full of admiring love and pityingtenderness, yet so courageous for his sake, that it called thehealthy blood into his face, brightened his glance, and animated hisheart.  If there had been any eyes to notice the influence of herlook, on Sydney Carton, it would have been seen to be the sameinfluence exactly.Before that unjust Tribunal, there was little or no order ofprocedure, ensuring to any accused person any reasonable hearing.There could have been no such Revolution, if all laws, forms, andceremonies, had not first been so monstrously abused, that thesuicidal vengeance of the Revolution was to scatter them all to thewinds.Every eye was turned to the jury.  The same determined patriots andgood republicans as yesterday and the day before, and to-morrow andthe day after.  Eager and prominent among them, one man with acraving face, and his fingers perpetually hovering about his lips,whose appearance gave great satisfaction to the spectators.  A life-thirsting, cannibal-looking, bloody-minded juryman, the Jacques Threeof St. Antoine.  The whole jury, as a jury of dogs empannelled to trythe deer.Every eye then turned to the five judges and the public prosecutor.No favourable leaning in that quarter to-day.  A fell, uncompromising,murderous business-meaning there.  Every eye then sought some othereye in the crowd, and gleamed at it approvingly; and heads nodded atone another, before bending forward with a strained attention.Charles Evremonde, called Darnay.  Released yesterday.  Reaccused andretaken yesterday.  Indictment delivered to him last night.  Suspectedand Denounced enemy of the Republic, Aristocrat, one of a family oftyrants, one of a race proscribed, for that they had used theirabolished privileges to the infamous oppression of the people.Charles Evremonde, called Darnay, in right of such proscription,absolutely Dead in Law.To this effect, in as few or fewer words, the Public Prosecutor.The President asked, was the Accused openly denounced or secretly?"Openly, President.""By whom?""Three voices.  Ernest Defarge, wine-vendor of St. Antoine.""Good.""Therese Defarge, his wife.""Good.""Alexandre Manette, physician."A great uproar took place in the court, and in the midst of it,Doctor Manette was seen, pale and trembling, standing where he hadbeen seated."President, I indignantly protest to you that this is a forgery and afraud.  You know the accused to be the husband of my daughter.  Mydaughter, and those dear to her, are far dearer to me than my life.Who and where is the false conspirator who says that I denounce thehusband of my child!""Citizen Manette, be tranquil.  To fail in submission to theauthority of the Tribunal would be to put yourself out of Law.As to what is dearer to you than life, nothing can be so dear to agood citizen as the Republic."Loud acclamations hailed this rebuke.  The President rang his bell,and with warmth resumed."If the Republic should demand of you the sacrifice of your childherself, you would have no duty but to sacrifice her.  Listen to whatis to follow.  In the meanwhile, be silent!"Frantic acclamations were again raised.  Doctor Manette sat down,with his eyes looking around, and his lips trembling; his daughterdrew closer to him.  The craving man on the jury rubbed his handstogether, and restored the usual hand to his mouth.Defarge was produced, when the court was quiet enough to admit of hisbeing heard, and rapidly expounded the story of the imprisonment, andof his having been a mere boy in the Doctor's service, and of therelease, and of the state of the prisoner when released and deliveredto him.  This short examination followed, for the court was quickwith its work."You did good service at the taking of the Bastille, citizen?""I believe so."Here, an excited woman screeched from the crowd:  "You were one of thebest patriots there.  Why not say so?  You were a cannonier that daythere, and you were among the first to enter the accursed fortresswhen it fell.  Patriots, I speak the truth!"It was The Vengeance who, amidst the warm commendations of theaudience, thus assisted the proceedings.  The President rang hisbell; but, The Vengeance, warming with encouragement, shrieked,"I defy that bell!" wherein she was likewise much commended."Inform the Tribunal of what you did that day within the Bastille,citizen.""I knew," said Defarge, looking down at his wife, who stood at thebottom of the steps on which he was raised, looking steadily up athim; "I knew that this prisoner, of whom I speak, had been confinedin a cell known as One Hundred and Five, North Tower.  I knew it fromhimself.  He knew himself by no other name than One Hundred and Five,North Tower, when he made shoes under my care.  As I serve my gunthat day, I resolve, when the place shall fall, to examine that cell.It falls.  I mount to the cell, with a fellow-citizen who is one ofthe Jury, directed by a gaoler.  I examine it, very closely.  In ahole in the chimney, where a stone has been worked out and replaced,I find a written paper.  This is that written paper.  I have made itmy business to examine some specimens of the writing of DoctorManette.  This is the writing of Doctor Manette.  I confide thispaper, in the writing of Doctor Manette, to the hands of the President.""Let it be read."In a dead silence and stillness--the prisoner under trial lookinglovingly at his wife, his wife only looking from him to look withsolicitude at her father, Doctor Manette keeping his eyes fixed onthe reader, Madame Defarge never taking hers from the prisoner,Defarge never taking his from his feasting wife, and all the othereyes there intent upon the Doctor, who saw none of them--the paperwas read, as follows.XThe Substance of the Shadow"I, Alexandre Manette, unfortunate physician, native of Beauvais,and afterwards resident in Paris, write this melancholy paper in mydoleful cell in the Bastille, during the last month of the year,1767.  I write it at stolen intervals, under every difficulty.I design to secrete it in the wall of the chimney, where I haveslowly and laboriously made a place of concealment for it.  Somepitying hand may find it there, when I and my sorrows are dust."These words are formed by the rusty iron point with which I writewith difficulty in scrapings of soot and charcoal from the chimney,mixed with blood, in the last month of the tenth year of my captivity.Hope has quite departed from my breast.  I know from terriblewarnings I have noted in myself that my reason will not long remainunimpaired, but I solemnly declare that I am at this time in thepossession of my right mind--that my memory is exact andcircumstantial--and that I write the truth as I shall answer forthese my last recorded words, whether they be ever read by men or not,at the Eternal Judgment-seat."One cloudy moonlight night, in the third week of December (I thinkthe twenty-second of the month) in the year 1757, I was walking on aretired part of the quay by the Seine for the refreshment of thefrosty air, at an hour's distance from my place of residence in theStreet of the School of Medicine, when a carriage came along behindme, driven very fast.  As I stood aside to let that carriage pass,apprehensive that it might otherwise run me down, a head was put outat the window, and a voice called to the driver to stop."The carriage stopped as soon as the driver could rein in his horses,and the same voice called to me by my name.  I answered.  The carriagewas then so far in advance of me that two gentlemen had time to openthe door and alight before I came up with it."I observed that they were both wrapped in cloaks, and appeared toconceal themselves.  As they stood side by side near the carriagedoor, I also observed that they both looked of about my own age, orrather younger, and that they were greatly alike, in stature, manner,voice, and (as far as I could see) face too."`You are Doctor Manette?' said one."I am.""`Doctor Manette, formerly of Beauvais,' said the other; `the youngphysician, originally an expert surgeon, who within the last year ortwo has made a rising reputation in Paris?'"`Gentlemen,' I returned, `I am that Doctor Manette of whom you speakso graciously.'"`We have been to your residence,' said the first, `and not being sofortunate as to find you there, and being informed that you wereprobably walking in this direction, we followed, in the hope ofovertaking you.  Will you please to enter the carriage?'"The manner of both was imperious, and they both moved, as thesewords were spoken, so as to place me between themselves and thecarriage door.  They were armed.  I was not."`Gentlemen,' said I, `pardon me; but I usually inquire who does methe honour to seek my assistance, and what is the nature of the caseto which I am summoned.'"The reply to this was made by him who had spoken second.'Doctor, your clients are people of condition.  As to the nature ofthe case, our confidence in your skill assures us that you willascertain it for yourself better than we can describe it.  Enough.Will you please to enter the carriage?'"I could do nothing but comply, and I entered it in silence.  Theyboth entered after me--the last springing in, after putting up thesteps.  The carriage turned about, and drove on at its former speed."I repeat this conversation exactly as it occurred.  I have no doubtthat it is, word for word, the same.  I describe everything exactlyas it took place, constraining my mind not to wander from the task.Where I make the broken marks that follow here, I leave off for thetime, and put my paper in its hiding-place.        *       *       *"The carriage left the streets behind, passed the North Barrier, andemerged upon the country road.  At two-thirds of a league from theBarrier--I did not estimate the distance at that time, but afterwardswhen I traversed it--it struck out of the main avenue, and presentlystopped at a solitary house, We all three alighted, and walked, by adamp soft footpath in a garden where a neglected fountain hadoverflowed, to the door of the house.  It was not opened immediately,in answer to the ringing of the bell, and one of my two conductorsstruck the man who opened it, with his heavy riding glove, across theface."There was nothing in this action to attract my particular attention,for I had seen common people struck more commonly than dogs.But, the other of the two, being angry likewise, struck the man inlike manner with his arm; the look and bearing of the brothers werethen so exactly alike, that I then first perceived them to be twinbrothers."From the time of our alighting at the outer gate (which we foundlocked, and which one of the brothers had opened to admit us, and hadrelocked), I had heard cries proceeding from an upper chamber.  I wasconducted to this chamber straight, the cries growing louder as weascended the stairs, and I found a patient in a high fever of the brain,lying on a bed."The patient was a woman of great beauty, and young; assuredly notmuch past twenty.  Her hair was torn and ragged, and her arms werebound to her sides with sashes and handkerchiefs.  I noticed thatthese bonds were all portions of a gentleman's dress.  On one ofthem, which was a fringed scarf for a dress of ceremony, I saw thearmorial bearings of a Noble, and the letter E."I saw this, within the first minute of my contemplation of thepatient; for, in her restless strivings she had turned over on herface on the edge of the bed, had drawn the end of the scarf into hermouth, and was in danger of suffocation.  My first act was to put outmy hand to relieve her breathing; and in moving the scarf aside, theembroidery in the corner caught my sight."I turned her gently over, placed my hands upon her breast to calmher and keep her down, and looked into her face.  Her eyes weredilated and wild, and she constantly uttered piercing shrieks, andrepeated the words, `My husband, my father, and my brother!' andthen counted up to twelve, and said, `Hush!'  For an instant, and nomore, she would pause to listen, and then the piercing shrieks wouldbegin again, and she would repeat the cry, `My husband, my father,and my brother!' and would count up to twelve, and say, `Hush!'  Therewas no variation in the order, or the manner.  There was no cessation,but the regular moment's pause, in the utterance of these sounds."`How long,' I asked, `has this lasted?'"To distinguish the brothers, I will call them the elder and theyounger; by the elder, I mean him who exercised the most authority.It was the elder who replied, `Since about this hour last night.'"`She has a husband, a father, and a brother?'"`A brother.'"`I do not address her brother?'"He answered with great contempt, `No.'"`She has some recent association with the number twelve?'"The younger brother impatiently rejoined, `With twelve o'clock?'"`See, gentlemen,' said I, still keeping my hands upon her breast,'how useless I am, as you have brought me!  If I had known what I wascoming to see, I could have come provided.  As it is, time must belost.  There are no medicines to be obtained in this lonely place.'"The elder brother looked to the younger, who said haughtily, `Thereis a case of medicines here;' and brought it from a closet, and putit on the table.        *       *       *"I opened some of the bottles, smelt them, and put the stoppers to mylips.  If I had wanted to use anything save narcotic medicines thatwere poisons in themselves, I would not have administered any of those."`Do you doubt them?' asked the younger brother."`You see, monsieur, I am going to use them,' I replied, and said nomore."I made the patient swallow, with great difficulty, and after manyefforts, the dose that I desired to give.  As I intended to repeat itafter a while, and as it was necessary to watch its influence, I thensat down by the side of the bed.  There was a timid and suppressedwoman in attendance (wife of the man down-stairs), who had retreatedinto a corner.  The house was damp and decayed, indifferentlyfurnished--evidently, recently occupied and temporarily used.Some thick old hangings had been nailed up before the windows, todeaden the sound of the shrieks.  They continued to be uttered intheir regular succession, with the cry, `My husband, my father, andmy brother!'  the counting up to twelve, and `Hush!' The frenzy wasso violent, that I had not unfastened the bandages restraining thearms; but, I had looked to them, to see that they were not painful.The only spark of encouragement in the case, was, that my hand uponthe sufferer's breast had this much soothing influence, that forminutes at a time it tranquillised the figure.  It had no effect uponthe cries; no pendulum could be more regular."For the reason that my hand had this effect (I assume), I had sat bythe side of the bed for half an hour, with the two brothers lookingon, before the elder said:"`There is another patient.'"I was startled, and asked, `Is it a pressing case?'"`You had better see,' he carelessly answered; and took up a light.        *       *       *"The other patient lay in a back room across a second staircase,which was a species of loft over a stable.  There was a low plasteredceiling to a part of it; the rest was open, to the ridge of the tiledroof, and there were beams across.  Hay and straw were stored in thatportion of the place, fagots for firing, and a heap of apples in sand.I had to pass through that part, to get at the other.  My memory iscircumstantial and unshaken.  I try it with these details, and I seethem all, in this my cell in the Bastille, near the close of thetenth year of my captivity, as I saw them all that night."On some hay on the ground, with a cushion thrown under his head, laya handsome peasant boy--a boy of not more than seventeen at the most.He lay on his back, with his teeth set, his right hand clenched onhis breast, and his glaring eyes looking straight upward.  I couldnot see where his wound was, as I kneeled on one knee over him;but, I could see that he was dying of a wound from a sharp point."`I am a doctor, my poor fellow,' said I.  `Let me examine it.'"`I do not want it examined,' he answered; `let it be.'"It was under his hand, and I soothed him to let me move his handaway.  The wound was a sword-thrust, received from twenty to twenty-four hours before, but no skill could have saved him if it had beenlooked to without delay.  He was then dying fast.  As I turned myeyes to the elder brother, I saw him looking down at this handsomeboy whose life was ebbing out, as if he were a wounded bird, or hare,or rabbit; not at all as if he were a fellow-creature."`How has this been done, monsieur?' said I."`A crazed young common dog!  A serf!  Forced my brother to draw upon him,and has fallen by my brother's sword--like a gentleman.'"There was no touch of pity, sorrow, or kindred humanity, in thisanswer.  The speaker seemed to acknowledge that it was inconvenientto have that different order of creature dying there, and that itwould have been better if he had died in the usual obscure routine ofhis vermin kind.  He was quite incapable of any compassionate feelingabout the boy, or about his fate."The boy's eyes had slowly moved to him as he had spoken, and theynow slowly moved to me."`Doctor, they are very proud, these Nobles; but we common dogs areproud too, sometimes.  They plunder us, outrage us, beat us, kill us;but we have a little pride left, sometimes.  She--have you seen her,Doctor?'"The shrieks and the cries were audible there, though subdued by thedistance.  He referred to them, as if she were lying in our presence."I said, `I have seen her.'"`She is my sister, Doctor.  They have had their shameful rights,these Nobles, in the modesty and virtue of our sisters, many years,but we have had good girls among us.  I know it, and have heard myfather say so.  She was a good girl.  She was betrothed to a goodyoung man, too:  a tenant of his.  We were all tenants of his--that man'swho stands there.  The other is his brother, the worst of a bad race.'"It was with the greatest difficulty that the boy gathered bodilyforce to speak; but, his spirit spoke with a dreadful emphasis."`We were so robbed by that man who stands there, as all we commondogs are by those superior Beings--taxed by him without mercy, obligedto work for him without pay, obliged to grind our corn at his mill,obliged to feed scores of his tame birds on our wretched crops, andforbidden for our lives to keep a single tame bird of our own,pillaged and plundered to that degree that when we chanced to have abit of meat, we ate it in fear, with the door barred and the shuttersclosed, that his people should not see it and take it from us--I say,we were so robbed, and hunted, and were made so poor, that our fathertold us it was a dreadful thing to bring a child into the world, andthat what we should most pray for, was, that our women might be barrenand our miserable race die out!'"I had never before seen the sense of being oppressed, bursting forthlike a fire.  I had supposed that it must be latent in the peoplesomewhere; but, I had never seen it break out, until I saw it in thedying boy."`Nevertheless, Doctor, my sister married.  He was ailing at thattime, poor fellow, and she married her lover, that she might tend andcomfort him in our cottage--our dog-hut, as that man would call it.She had not been married many weeks, when that man's brother saw herand admired her, and asked that man to lend her to him--for what arehusbands among us!  He was willing enough, but my sister was good andvirtuous, and hated his brother with a hatred as strong as mine.What did the two then, to persuade her husband to use his influencewith her, to make her willing?'"The boy's eyes, which had been fixed on mine, slowly turned to thelooker-on, and I saw in the two faces that all he said was true.The two opposing kinds of pride confronting one another, I can see,even in this Bastille; the gentleman's, all negligent indifference;the peasants, all trodden-down sentiment, and passionate revenge."`You know, Doctor, that it is among the Rights of these Nobles toharness us common dogs to carts, and drive us.  They so harnessed himand drove him.  You know that it is among their Rights to keep us intheir grounds all night, quieting the frogs, in order that theirnoble sleep may not be disturbed.  They kept him out in the unwholesomemists at night, and ordered him back into his harness in the day.But he was not persuaded.  No!  Taken out of harness one day at noon,to feed--if he could find food--he sobbed twelve times, once forevery stroke of the bell, and died on her bosom.'"Nothing human could have held life in the boy but his determinationto tell all his wrong.  He forced back the gathering shadows of death,as he forced his clenched right hand to remain clenched, and to coverhis wound."`Then, with that man's permission and even with his aid, his brothertook her away; in spite of what I know she must have told hisbrother--and what that is, will not be long unknown to you, Doctor,if it is now--his brother took her away--for his pleasure anddiversion, for a little while.  I saw her pass me on the road.When I took the tidings home, our father's heart burst; he neverspoke one of the words that filled it.  I took my young sister (forI have another) to a place beyond the reach of this man, and where,at least, she will never be _his_ vassal.  Then, I tracked thebrother here, and last night climbed in--a common dog, but sword inhand.--Where is the loft window?  It was somewhere here?'"The room was darkening to his sight; the world was narrowing aroundhim.  I glanced about me, and saw that the hay and straw weretrampled over the floor, as if there had been a struggle."`She heard me, and ran in.  I told her not to come near us till hewas dead.  He came in and first tossed me some pieces of money; thenstruck at me with a whip.  But I, though a common dog, so struck athim as to make him draw.  Let him break into as many pieces as hewill, the sword that he stained with my common blood; he drew todefend himself--thrust at me with all his skill for his life.'"My glance had fallen, but a few moments before, on the fragments ofa broken sword, lying among the hay.  That weapon was a gentleman's.In another place, lay an old sword that seemed to have been a soldier's."`Now, lift me up, Doctor; lift me up.  Where is he?'"`He is not here,' I said, supporting the boy, and thinking that hereferred to the brother."`He!  Proud as these nobles are, he is afraid to see me.  Where isthe man who was here?  Turn my face to him.'"I did so, raising the boy's head against my knee.  But, invested forthe moment with extraordinary power, he raised himself completely:obliging me to rise too, or I could not have still supported him."`Marquis,' said the boy, turned to him with his eyes opened wide,and his right hand raised, `in the days when all these things are tobe answered for, I summon you and yours, to the last of your bad race,to answer for them.  I mark this cross of blood upon you, as a signthat I do it.  In the days when all these things are to be answeredfor, I summon your brother, the worst of the bad race, to answer forthem separately.  I mark this cross of blood upon him, as a sign thatI do it.'"Twice, he put his hand to the wound in his breast, and with hisforefinger drew a cross in the air.  He stood for an instant with thefinger yet raised, and as it dropped, he dropped with it, and I laidhim down dead.        *       *       *"When I returned to the bedside of the young woman, I found herraving in precisely the same order of continuity.  I knew that thismight last for many hours, and that it would probably end in thesilence of the grave."I repeated the medicines I had given her, and I sat at the side ofthe bed until the night was far advanced.  She never abated thepiercing quality of her shrieks, never stumbled in the distinctnessor the order of her words.  They were always `My husband, my father,and my brother!  One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine,ten, eleven, twelve.  Hush!'"This lasted twenty-six hours from the time when I first saw her.  Ihad come and gone twice, and was again sitting by her, when she beganto falter.  I did what little could be done to assist that opportunity,and by-and-bye she sank into a lethargy, and lay like the dead."It was as if the wind and rain had lulled at last, after a long andfearful storm.  I released her arms, and called the woman to assistme to compose her figure and the dress she had torn.  It was then thatI knew her condition to be that of one in whom the first expectationsof being a mother have arisen; and it was then that I lost the littlehope I had had of her."`Is she dead?' asked the Marquis, whom I will still describe as theelder brother, coming booted into the room from his horse."`Not dead,' said I; `but like to die.'"`What strength there is in these common bodies!' he said, lookingdown at her with some curiosity."`There is prodigious strength,' I answered him, `in sorrow and despair.'"He first laughed at my words, and then frowned at them.  He moved achair with his foot near to mine, ordered the woman away, and said ina subdued voice,"`Doctor, finding my brother in this difficulty with these hinds,I recommended that your aid should be invited.  Your reputation ishigh, and, as a young man with your fortune to make, you are probablymindful of your interest.  The things that you see here, are thingsto be seen, and not spoken of.'"I listened to the patient's breathing, and avoided answering."`Do you honour me with your attention, Doctor?'"`Monsieur,' said I, `in my profession, the communications ofpatients are always received in confidence.'  I was guarded in myanswer, for I was troubled in my mind with what I had heard and seen."Her breathing was so difficult to trace, that I carefully tried thepulse and the heart.  There was life, and no more.  Looking round asI resumed my seat, I found both the brothers intent upon me.        *       *       *"I write with so much difficulty, the cold is so severe, I am sofearful of being detected and consigned to an underground cell andtotal darkness, that I must abridge this narrative.  There is noconfusion or failure in my memory; it can recall, and could detail,every word that was ever spoken between me and those brothers."She lingered for a week.  Towards the last, I could understand somefew syllables that she said to me, by placing my ear close to her lips.She asked me where she was, and I told her; who I was, and I told her.It was in vain that I asked her for her family name.  She faintlyshook her head upon the pillow, and kept her secret, as the boy had done."I had no opportunity of asking her any question, until I had toldthe brothers she was sinking fast, and could not live another day.Until then, though no one was ever presented to her consciousnesssave the woman and myself, one or other of them had always jealouslysat behind the curtain at the head of the bed when I was there.But when it came to that, they seemed careless what communication Imight hold with her; as if--the thought passed through my mind--Iwere dying too."I always observed that their pride bitterly resented the youngerbrother's (as I call him) having crossed swords with a peasant, andthat peasant a boy.  The only consideration that appeared to affectthe mind of either of them was the consideration that this was highlydegrading to the family, and was ridiculous.  As often as I caughtthe younger brother's eyes, their expression reminded me that hedisliked me deeply, for knowing what I knew from the boy.  He wassmoother and more polite to me than the elder; but I saw this.I also saw that I was an incumbrance in the mind of the elder, too."My patient died, two hours before midnight--at a time, by my watch,answering almost to the minute when I had first seen her.  I wasalone with her, when her forlorn young head drooped gently on oneside, and all her earthly wrongs and sorrows ended."The brothers were waiting in a room down-stairs, impatient to rideaway.  I had heard them, alone at the bedside, striking their bootswith their riding-whips, and loitering up and down."`At last she is dead?' said the elder, when I went in."`She is dead,' said I."`I congratulate you, my brother,' were his words as he turned round."He had before offered me money, which I had postponed taking.  Henow gave me a rouleau of gold.  I took it from his hand, but laid iton the table.  I had considered the question, and had resolved toaccept nothing."`Pray excuse me,' said I. `Under the circumstances, no.'"They exchanged looks, but bent their heads to me as I bent mine tothem, and we parted without another word on either side.        *       *       *"I am weary, weary, weary--worn down by misery.  I cannot read what Ihave written with this gaunt hand."Early in the morning, the rouleau of gold was left at my door in alittle box, with my name on the outside.  From the first, I hadanxiously considered what I ought to do.  I decided, that day, towrite privately to the Minister, stating the nature of the two casesto which I had been summoned, and the place to which I had gone:  ineffect, stating all the circumstances.  I knew what Court influencewas, and what the immunities of the Nobles were, and I expected thatthe matter would never be heard of; but, I wished to relieve my ownmind.  I had kept the matter a profound secret, even from my wife;and this, too, I resolved to state in my letter.  I had no apprehensionwhatever of my real danger; but I was conscious that there might bedanger for others, if others were compromised by possessing theknowledge that I possessed."I was much engaged that day, and could not complete my letter thatnight.  I rose long before my usual time next morning to finish it.It was the last day of the year.  The letter was lying before me justcompleted, when I was told that a lady waited, who wished to see me.        *       *       *"I am growing more and more unequal to the task I have set myself.It is so cold, so dark, my senses are so benumbed, and the gloom uponme is so dreadful."The lady was young, engaging, and handsome, but not marked for longlife.  She was in great agitation.  She presented herself to me asthe wife of the Marquis St. Evremonde.  I connected the title bywhich the boy had addressed the elder brother, with the initialletter embroidered on the scarf, and had no difficulty in arriving atthe conclusion that I had seen that nobleman very lately."My memory is still accurate, but I cannot write the words of ourconversation.  I suspect that I am watched more closely than I was,and I know not at what times I may be watched.  She had in partsuspected, and in part discovered, the main facts of the cruel story,of her husband's share in it, and my being resorted to.  She did notknow that the girl was dead.  Her hope had been, she said in greatdistress, to show her, in secret, a woman's sympathy.  Her hope hadbeen to avert the wrath of Heaven from a House that had long beenhateful to the suffering many."She had reasons for believing that there was a young sister living,and her greatest desire was, to help that sister.  I could tell hernothing but that there was such a sister; beyond that, I knew nothing.Her inducement to come to me, relying on my confidence, had been thehope that I could tell her the name and place of abode.  Whereas,to this wretched hour I am ignorant of both.        *       *       *"These scraps of paper fail me.  One was taken from me, with awarning, yesterday.  I must finish my record to-day."She was a good, compassionate lady, and not happy in her marriage.How could she be!  The brother distrusted and disliked her, and hisinfluence was all opposed to her; she stood in dread of him, and indread of her husband too.  When I handed her down to the door, therewas a child, a pretty boy from two to three years old, in her carriage."`For his sake, Doctor,' she said, pointing to him in tears, `I woulddo all I can to make what poor amends I can.  He will never prosperin his inheritance otherwise.  I have a presentiment that if no otherinnocent atonement is made for this, it will one day be required ofhim.  What I have left to call my own--it is little beyond the worthof a few jewels--I will make it the first charge of his life tobestow, with the compassion and lamenting of his dead mother, on thisinjured family, if the sister can be discovered.'"She kissed the boy, and said, caressing him, `It is for thine owndear sake.  Thou wilt be faithful, little Charles?' The childanswered her bravely, `Yes!' I kissed her hand, and she took him inher arms, and went away caressing him.  I never saw her more."As she had mentioned her husband's name in the faith that I knew it,I added no mention of it to my letter.  I sealed my letter, and, nottrusting it out of my own hands, delivered it myself that day."That night, the last night of the year, towards nine o'clock, a manin a black dress rang at my gate, demanded to see me, and softlyfollowed my servant, Ernest Defarge, a youth, up-stairs.  When myservant came into the room where I sat with my wife--O my wife,beloved of my heart!  My fair young English wife!--we saw the man,who was supposed to be at the gate, standing silent behind him."An urgent case in the Rue St. Honore, he said.  It would not detainme, he had a coach in waiting."It brought me here, it brought me to my grave.  When I was clear ofthe house, a black muffler was drawn tightly over my mouth frombehind, and my arms were pinioned.  The two brothers crossed the roadfrom a dark corner, and identified me with a single gesture.  TheMarquis took from his pocket the letter I had written, showed it me,burnt it in the light of a lantern that was held, and extinguishedthe ashes with his foot.  Not a word was spoken.  I was brought here,I was brought to my living grave."If it had pleased _God_ to put it in the hard heart of either of thebrothers, in all these frightful years, to grant me any tidings of mydearest wife--so much as to let me know by a word whether alive ordead--I might have thought that He had not quite abandoned them.But, now I believe that the mark of the red cross is fatal to them,and that they have no part in His mercies.  And them and theirdescendants, to the last of their race, I, Alexandre Manette, unhappyprisoner, do this last night of the year 1767, in my unbearable agony,denounce to the times when all these things shall be answered for.I denounce them to Heaven and to earth."A terrible sound arose when the reading of this document was done.  Asound of craving and eagerness that had nothing articulate in it butblood.  The narrative called up the most revengeful passions of thetime, and there was not a head in the nation but must have droppedbefore it.Little need, in presence of that tribunal and that auditory, to showhow the Defarges had not made the paper public, with the othercaptured Bastille memorials borne in procession, and had kept it,biding their time.  Little need to show that this detested familyname had long been anathematised by Saint Antoine, and was wroughtinto the fatal register.  The man never trod ground whose virtues andservices would have sustained him in that place that day, againstsuch denunciation.And all the worse for the doomed man, that the denouncer was awell-known citizen, his own attached friend, the father of his wife.One of the frenzied aspirations of the populace was, for imitationsof the questionable public virtues of antiquity, and for sacrificesand self-immolations on the people's altar.  Therefore when thePresident said (else had his own head quivered on his shoulders),that the good physician of the Republic would deserve better still ofthe Republic by rooting out an obnoxious family of Aristocrats, andwould doubtless feel a sacred glow and joy in making his daughter awidow and her child an orphan, there was wild excitement, patrioticfervour, not a touch of human sympathy."Much influence around him, has that Doctor?" murmured Madame Defarge,smiling to The Vengeance.  "Save him now, my Doctor, save him!"At every juryman's vote, there was a roar.  Another and another.Roar and roar.Unanimously voted.  At heart and by descent an Aristocrat, an enemyof the Republic, a notorious oppressor of the People.  Back to theConciergerie, and Death within four-and-twenty hours!XIDuskThe wretched wife of the innocent man thus doomed to die, fell underthe sentence, as if she had been mortally stricken.  But, she utteredno sound; and so strong was the voice within her, representing thatit was she of all the world who must uphold him in his misery and notaugment it, that it quickly raised her, even from that shock.The Judges having to take part in a public demonstration out ofdoors, the Tribunal adjourned.  The quick noise and movement of thecourt's emptying itself by many passages had not ceased, when Luciestood stretching out her arms towards her husband, with nothing inher face but love and consolation."If I might touch him!  If I might embrace him once!  O, good citizens,if you would have so much compassion for us!"There was but a gaoler left, along with two of the four men who hadtaken him last night, and Barsad.  The people had all poured out tothe show in the streets.  Barsad proposed to the rest, "Let herembrace him then; it is but a moment."  It was silently acquiesced in,and they passed her over the seats in the hall to a raised place,where he, by leaning over the dock, could fold her in his arms."Farewell, dear darling of my soul.  My parting blessing on my love.We shall meet again, where the weary are at rest!"They were her husband's words, as he held her to his bosom."I can bear it, dear Charles.  I am supported from above:  don'tsuffer for me.  A parting blessing for our child.""I send it to her by you.  I kiss her by you.  I say farewell to herby you.""My husband.  No!  A moment!"  He was tearing himself apart from her."We shall not be separated long.  I feel that this will break my heartby-and-bye; but I will do my duty while I can, and when I leave her,God will raise up friends for her, as He did for me."Her father had followed her, and would have fallen on his knees toboth of them, but that Darnay put out a hand and seized him, crying:"No, no!  What have you done, what have you done, that you shouldkneel to us!  We know now, what a struggle you made of old.  We know,now what you underwent when you suspected my descent, and when youknew it.  We know now, the natural antipathy you strove against, andconquered, for her dear sake.  We thank you with all our hearts, andall our love and duty.  Heaven be with you!"Her father's only answer was to draw his hands through his white hair,and wring them with a shriek of anguish."It could not be otherwise," said the prisoner.  "All things haveworked together as they have fallen out.  It was the always-vainendeavour to discharge my poor mother's trust that first brought myfatal presence near you.  Good could never come of such evil,a happier end was not in nature to so unhappy a beginning.  Be comforted,and forgive me.  Heaven bless you!"As he was drawn away, his wife released him, and stood looking afterhim with her hands touching one another in the attitude of prayer,and with a radiant look upon her face, in which there was even acomforting smile.  As he went out at the prisoners' door, she turned,laid her head lovingly on her father's breast, tried to speak to him,and fell at his feet.Then, issuing from the obscure corner from which he had never moved,Sydney Carton came and took her up.  Only her father and Mr. Lorrywere with her.  His arm trembled as it raised her, and supported her head.Yet, there was an air about him that was not all of pity--that had a flushof pride in it."Shall I take her to a coach?  I shall never feel her weight."He carried her lightly to the door, and laid her tenderly down in acoach.  Her father and their old friend got into it, and he took hisseat beside the driver.When they arrived at the gateway where he had paused in the dark notmany hours before, to picture to himself on which of the rough stonesof the street her feet had trodden, he lifted her again, and carriedher up the staircase to their rooms.  There, he laid her down on acouch, where her child and Miss Pross wept over her."Don't recall her to herself," he said, softly, to the latter, "she isbetter so.  Don't revive her to consciousness, while she only faints.""Oh, Carton, Carton, dear Carton!" cried little Lucie, springing upand throwing her arms passionately round him, in a burst of grief."Now that you have come, I think you will do something to help mamma,something to save papa!  O, look at her, dear Carton!  Can you, of allthe people who love her, bear to see her so?"He bent over the child, and laid her blooming cheek against his face.He put her gently from him, and looked at her unconscious mother."Before I go," he said, and paused--"I may kiss her?"It was remembered afterwards that when he bent down and touched herface with his lips, he murmured some words.  The child, who wasnearest to him, told them afterwards, and told her grandchildren whenshe was a handsome old lady, that she heard him say, "A life you love."When he had gone out into the next room, he turned suddenly onMr. Lorry and her father, who were following, and said to the latter:"You had great influence but yesterday, Doctor Manette; let it atleast be tried.  These judges, and all the men in power, are veryfriendly to you, and very recognisant of your services; are they not?""Nothing connected with Charles was concealed from me.  I had thestrongest assurances that I should save him; and I did."  He returnedthe answer in great trouble, and very slowly."Try them again.  The hours between this and to-morrow afternoon arefew and short, but try.""I intend to try.  I will not rest a moment.""That's well.  I have known such energy as yours do great thingsbefore now--though never," he added, with a smile and a sigh together,"such great things as this.  But try!  Of little worth as life is whenwe misuse it, it is worth that effort.  It would cost nothing to laydown if it were not.""I will go," said Doctor Manette, "to the Prosecutor and the Presidentstraight, and I will go to others whom it is better not to name.I will write too, and--But stay!  There is a Celebration in the streets,and no one will be accessible until dark.""That's true.  Well!  It is a forlorn hope at the best, and not muchthe forlorner for being delayed till dark.  I should like to know howyou speed; though, mind!  I expect nothing!  When are you likely tohave seen these dread powers, Doctor Manette?""Immediately after dark, I should hope.  Within an hour or two from this.""It will be dark soon after four.  Let us stretch the hour or two.If I go to Mr. Lorry's at nine, shall I hear what you have done,either from our friend or from yourself?""Yes.""May you prosper!"Mr. Lorry followed Sydney to the outer door, and, touching him on theshoulder as he was going away, caused him to turn."I have no hope," said Mr. Lorry, in a low and sorrowful whisper."Nor have I.""If any one of these men, or all of these men, were disposed to sparehim--which is a large supposition; for what is his life, or any man'sto them!--I doubt if they durst spare him after the demonstration inthe court.""And so do I.  I heard the fall of the axe in that sound."Mr. Lorry leaned his arm upon the door-post, and bowed his face upon it."Don't despond," said Carton, very gently; "don't grieve.I encouraged Doctor Manette in this idea, because I felt that itmight one day be consolatory to her.  Otherwise, she might think `hislife was want only thrown away or wasted,' and that might trouble her.""Yes, yes, yes," returned Mr. Lorry, drying his eyes, "you areright.  But he will perish; there is no real hope.""Yes.  He will perish:  there is no real hope," echoed Carton.And walked with a settled step, down-stairs.XIIDarknessSydney Carton paused in the street, not quite decided where to go."At Tellson's banking-house at nine," he said, with a musing face."Shall I do well, in the mean time, to show myself?  I think so.It is best that these people should know there is such a man as Ihere; it is a sound precaution, and may be a necessary preparation.But care, care, care!  Let me think it out!"Checking his steps which had begun to tend towards an object, he tooka turn or two in the already darkening street, and traced the thoughtin his mind to its possible consequences.  His first impression wasconfirmed.  "It is best," he said, finally resolved, "that thesepeople should know there is such a man as I here."  And he turned hisface towards Saint Antoine.Defarge had described himself, that day, as the keeper of a wine-shopin the Saint Antoine suburb.  It was not difficult for one who knewthe city well, to find his house without asking any question.  Havingascertained its situation, Carton came out of those closer streetsagain, and dined at a place of refreshment and fell sound asleepafter dinner.  For the first time in many years, he had no strong drink.Since last night he had taken nothing but a little light thin wine,and last night he had dropped the brandy slowly down on Mr. Lorry'shearth like a man who had done with it.It was as late as seven o'clock when he awoke refreshed, and went outinto the streets again.  As he passed along towards Saint Antoine, hestopped at a shop-window where there was a mirror, and slightlyaltered the disordered arrangement of his loose cravat, and his coat-collar, and his wild hair.  This done, he went on direct to Defarge's,and went in.There happened to be no customer in the shop but Jacques Three,of the restless fingers and the croaking voice.  This man, whom hehad seen upon the Jury, stood drinking at the little counter, inconversation with the Defarges, man and wife.  The Vengeance assistedin the conversation, like a regular member of the establishment.As Carton walked in, took his seat and asked (in very indifferentFrench) for a small measure of wine, Madame Defarge cast a carelessglance at him, and then a keener, and then a keener, and thenadvanced to him herself, and asked him what it was he had ordered.He repeated what he had already said."English?" asked Madame Defarge, inquisitively raising her dark eyebrows.After looking at her, as if the sound of even a single French wordwere slow to express itself to him, he answered, in his former strongforeign accent.  "Yes, madame, yes.  I am English!"Madame Defarge returned to her counter to get the wine, and, as hetook up a Jacobin journal and feigned to pore over it puzzling outits meaning, he heard her say, "I swear to you, like Evremonde!"Defarge brought him the wine, and gave him Good Evening."How?""Good evening.""Oh!  Good evening, citizen," filling his glass.  "Ah! and good wine.I drink to the Republic."Defarge went back to the counter, and said, "Certainly, a littlelike."  Madame sternly retorted, "I tell you a good deal like."Jacques Three pacifically remarked, "He is so much in your mind,see you, madame."  The amiable Vengeance added, with a laugh, "Yes,my faith!  And you are looking forward with so much pleasure to seeinghim once more to-morrow!"Carton followed the lines and words of his paper, with a slowforefinger, and with a studious and absorbed face.  They were allleaning their arms on the counter close together, speaking low.After a silence of a few moments, during which they all lookedtowards him without disturbing his outward attention from the Jacobineditor, they resumed their conversation."It is true what madame says," observed Jacques Three.  "Why stop?There is great force in that.  Why stop?""Well, well," reasoned Defarge, "but one must stop somewhere.After all, the question is still where?""At extermination," said madame."Magnificent!" croaked Jacques Three.  The Vengeance, also, highlyapproved."Extermination is good doctrine, my wife," said Defarge, rathertroubled; "in general, I say nothing against it.  But this Doctor hassuffered much; you have seen him to-day; you have observed his facewhen the paper was read.""I have observed his face!" repeated madame, contemptuously andangrily.  "Yes.  I have observed his face.  I have observed his faceto be not the face of a true friend of the Republic.  Let him takecare of his face!""And you have observed, my wife," said Defarge, in a deprecatorymanner, "the anguish of his daughter, which must be a dreadfulanguish to him!""I have observed his daughter," repeated madame; "yes, I haveobserved his daughter, more times than one.  I have observed herto-day, and I have observed her other days.  I have observed herin the court, and I have observed her in the street by the prison.Let me but lift my finger--!"  She seemed to raise it (the listener'seyes were always on his paper), and to let it fall with a rattle onthe ledge before her, as if the axe had dropped."The citizeness is superb!" croaked the Juryman."She is an Angel!" said The Vengeance, and embraced her."As to thee," pursued madame, implacably, addressing her husband,"if it depended on thee--which, happily, it does not--thou wouldstrescue this man even now.""No!" protested Defarge.  "Not if to lift this glass would do it!But I would leave the matter there.  I say, stop there.""See you then, Jacques," said Madame Defarge, wrathfully; "and seeyou, too, my little Vengeance; see you both!  Listen!  For other crimesas tyrants and oppressors, I have this race a long time on my register,doomed to destruction and extermination.  Ask my husband, is that so.""It is so," assented Defarge, without being asked."In the beginning of the great days, when the Bastille falls, hefinds this paper of to-day, and he brings it home, and in the middleof the night when this place is clear and shut, we read it, here onthis spot, by the light of this lamp.  Ask him, is that so.""It is so," assented Defarge."That night, I tell him, when the paper is read through, and the lampis burnt out, and the day is gleaming in above those shutters andbetween those iron bars, that I have now a secret to communicate.Ask him, is that so.""It is so," assented Defarge again."I communicate to him that secret.  I smite this bosom with these twohands as I smite it now, and I tell him, `Defarge, I was brought upamong the fishermen of the sea-shore, and that peasant family soinjured by the two Evremonde brothers, as that Bastille paper describes,is my family.  Defarge, that sister of the mortally wounded boy uponthe ground was my sister, that husband was my sister's husband, thatunborn child was their child, that brother was my brother, thatfather was my father, those dead are my dead, and that summons toanswer for those things descends to me!'  Ask him, is that so.""It is so," assented Defarge once more."Then tell Wind and Fire where to stop," returned madame; "but don'ttell me."Both her hearers derived a horrible enjoyment from the deadly natureof her wrath--the listener could feel how white she was, withoutseeing her--and both highly commended it.  Defarge, a weak minority,interposed a few words for the memory of the compassionate wife ofthe Marquis; but only elicited from his own wife a repetition of herlast reply.  "Tell the Wind and the Fire where to stop; not me!"Customers entered, and the group was broken up.  The English customerpaid for what he had had, perplexedly counted his change, and asked,as a stranger, to be directed towards the National Palace.Madame Defarge took him to the door, and put her arm on his, inpointing out the road.  The English customer was not without hisreflections then, that it might be a good deed to seize that arm,lift it, and strike under it sharp and deep.But, he went his way, and was soon swallowed up in the shadow of theprison wall.  At the appointed hour, he emerged from it to presenthimself in Mr. Lorry's room again, where he found the old gentlemanwalking to and fro in restless anxiety.  He said he had been withLucie until just now, and had only left her for a few minutes, tocome and keep his appointment.  Her father had not been seen, sincehe quitted the banking-house towards four o'clock.  She had somefaint hopes that his mediation might save Charles, but they were veryslight.  He had been more than five hours gone:  where could he be?Mr. Lorry waited until ten; but, Doctor Manette not returning, and hebeing unwilling to leave Lucie any longer, it was arranged that heshould go back to her, and come to the banking-house again at midnight.In the meanwhile, Carton would wait alone by the fire for the Doctor.He waited and waited, and the clock struck twelve; but Doctor Manettedid not come back.  Mr. Lorry returned, and found no tidings of him,and brought none.  Where could he be?They were discussing this question, and were almost building up someweak structure of hope on his prolonged absence, when they heard himon the stairs.  The instant he entered the room, it was plain thatall was lost.Whether he had really been to any one, or whether he had been allthat time traversing the streets, was never known.  As he stoodstaring at them, they asked him no question, for his face told themeverything."I cannot find it," said he, "and I must have it.  Where is it?"His head and throat were bare, and, as he spoke with a helpless lookstraying all around, he took his coat off, and let it drop on the floor."Where is my bench?  I have been looking everywhere for my bench, andI can't find it.  What have they done with my work?  Time presses:I must finish those shoes."They looked at one another, and their hearts died within them."Come, come!" said he, in a whimpering miserable way; "let me getto work.  Give me my work."Receiving no answer, he tore his hair, and beat his feet upon theground, like a distracted child."Don't torture a poor forlorn wretch," he implored them, with a dreadfulcry; "but give me my work!  What is to become of us, if those shoes arenot done to-night?"Lost, utterly lost!It was so clearly beyond hope to reason with him, or try to restore him,that--as if by agreement--they each put a hand upon his shoulder,and soothed him to sit down before the fire, with a promise that heshould have his work presently.  He sank into the chair, and broodedover the embers, and shed tears.  As if all that had happened sincethe garret time were a momentary fancy, or a dream, Mr. Lorry saw himshrink into the exact figure that Defarge had had in keeping.Affected, and impressed with terror as they both were, by thisspectacle of ruin, it was not a time to yield to such emotions.His lonely daughter, bereft of her final hope and reliance, appealedto them both too strongly.  Again, as if by agreement, they looked atone another with one meaning in their faces.Carton was the first to speak:"The last chance is gone:  it was not much.  Yes; he had better betaken to her.  But, before you go, will you, for a moment, steadilyattend to me?  Don't ask me why I make the stipulations I am going tomake, and exact the promise I am going to exact; I have a reason--agood one.""I do not doubt it," answered Mr. Lorry.  "Say on."The figure in the chair between them, was all the time monotonouslyrocking itself to and fro, and moaning.  They spoke in such a tone asthey would have used if they had been watching by a sick-bed in the night.Carton stooped to pick up the coat, which lay almost entangling his feet.As he did so, a small case in which the Doctor was accustomed tocarry the lists of his day's duties, fell lightly on the floor.Carton took it up, and there was a folded paper in it.  "We shouldlook at this!" he said.  Mr. Lorry nodded his consent.  He opened it,and exclaimed, "Thank _God!_""What is it?" asked Mr. Lorry, eagerly."A moment!  Let me speak of it in its place.  First," he put his handin his coat, and took another paper from it, "that is the certificatewhich enables me to pass out of this city.  Look at it.  You see--Sydney Carton, an Englishman?"Mr. Lorry held it open in his hand, gazing in his earnest face."Keep it for me until to-morrow.  I shall see him to-morrow,you remember, and I had better not take it into the prison.""Why not?""I don't know; I prefer not to do so.  Now, take this paper thatDoctor Manette has carried about him.  It is a similar certificate,enabling him and his daughter and her child, at any time, to pass thebarrier and the frontier!  You see?""Yes!""Perhaps he obtained it as his last and utmost precaution againstevil, yesterday.  When is it dated?  But no matter; don't stay to look;put it up carefully with mine and your own.  Now, observe!  I neverdoubted until within this hour or two, that he had, or could havesuch a paper.  It is good, until recalled.  But it may be soon recalled,and, I have reason to think, will be.""They are not in danger?""They are in great danger.  They are in danger of denunciation byMadame Defarge.  I know it from her own lips.  I have overheard wordsof that woman's, to-night, which have presented their danger to me instrong colours.  I have lost no time, and since then, I have seen thespy.  He confirms me.  He knows that a wood-sawyer, living by theprison wall, is under the control of the Defarges, and has beenrehearsed by Madame Defarge as to his having seen Her"--he nevermentioned Lucie's name--"making signs and signals to prisoners.It is easy to foresee that the pretence will be the common one, aprison plot, and that it will involve her life--and perhaps herchild's--and perhaps her father's--for both have been seen with herat that place.  Don't look so horrified.  You will save them all.""Heaven grant I may, Carton!  But how?""I am going to tell you how.  It will depend on you, and it coulddepend on no better man.  This new denunciation will certainly nottake place until after to-morrow; probably not until two or threedays afterwards; more probably a week afterwards.  You know it is acapital crime, to mourn for, or sympathise with, a victim of theGuillotine.  She and her father would unquestionably be guilty ofthis crime, and this woman (the inveteracy of whose pursuit cannotbe described) would wait to add that strength to her case, and makeherself doubly sure.  You follow me?""So attentively, and with so much confidence in what you say, thatfor the moment I lose sight," touching the back of the Doctor'schair, "even of this distress.""You have money, and can buy the means of travelling to the seacoastas quickly as the journey can be made.  Your preparations have beencompleted for some days, to return to England.  Early to-morrow haveyour horses ready, so that they may be in starting trim at two o'clockin the afternoon.""It shall be done!"His manner was so fervent and inspiring, that Mr. Lorry caught theflame, and was as quick as youth."You are a noble heart.  Did I say we could depend upon no better man?Tell her, to-night, what you know of her danger as involving herchild and her father.  Dwell upon that, for she would lay her ownfair head beside her husband's cheerfully."  He faltered for an instant;then went on as before.  "For the sake of her child and her father,press upon her the necessity of leaving Paris, with them and you,at that hour.  Tell her that it was her husband's last arrangement.Tell her that more depends upon it than she dare believe, or hope.You think that her father, even in this sad state, will submithimself to her; do you not?""I am sure of it.""I thought so.  Quietly and steadily have all these arrangements madein the courtyard here, even to the taking of your own seat in thecarriage.  The moment I come to you, take me in, and drive away.""I understand that I wait for you under all circumstances?""You have my certificate in your hand with the rest, you know,and will reserve my place.  Wait for nothing but to have my placeoccupied, and then for England!""Why, then," said Mr. Lorry, grasping his eager but so firm andsteady hand, "it does not all depend on one old man, but I shall havea young and ardent man at my side.""By the help of Heaven you shall!  Promise me solemnly that nothingwill influence you to alter the course on which we now stand pledgedto one another.""Nothing, Carton.""Remember these words to-morrow:  change the course, or delay init--for any reason--and no life can possibly be saved, and manylives must inevitably be sacrificed.""I will remember them.  I hope to do my part faithfully.""And I hope to do mine.  Now, good bye!"Though he said it with a grave smile of earnestness, and though heeven put the old man's hand to his lips, he did not part from himthen.  He helped him so far to arouse the rocking figure before thedying embers, as to get a cloak and hat put upon it, and to tempt itforth to find where the bench and work were hidden that it stillmoaningly besought to have.  He walked on the other side of it andprotected it to the courtyard of the house where the afflictedheart--so happy in the memorable time when he had revealed his owndesolate heart to it--outwatched the awful night.  He entered thecourtyard and remained there for a few moments alone, looking up atthe light in the window of her room.  Before he went away, hebreathed a blessing towards it, and a Farewell.XIIIFifty-twoIn the black prison of the Conciergerie, the doomed of the dayawaited their fate.  They were in number as the weeks of the year.Fifty-two were to roll that afternoon on the life-tide of the city tothe boundless everlasting sea.  Before their cells were quit of them,new occupants were appointed; before their blood ran into the bloodspilled yesterday, the blood that was to mingle with theirs to-morrowwas already set apart.Two score and twelve were told off.  From the farmer-general of seventy,whose riches could not buy his life, to the seamstress of twenty,whose poverty and obscurity could not save her.  Physical diseases,engendered in the vices and neglects of men, will seize on victimsof all degrees; and the frightful moral disorder, born of unspeakablesuffering, intolerable oppression, and heartless indifference,smote equally without distinction.Charles Darnay, alone in a cell, had sustained himself with noflattering delusion since he came to it from the Tribunal. In everyline of the narrative he had heard, he had heard his condemnation.He had fully comprehended that no personal influence could possiblysave him, that he was virtually sentenced by the millions, and thatunits could avail him nothing.Nevertheless, it was not easy, with the face of his beloved wifefresh before him, to compose his mind to what it must bear.  His holdon life was strong, and it was very, very hard, to loosen; by gradualefforts and degrees unclosed a little here, it clenched the tighterthere; and when he brought his strength to bear on that hand and ityielded, this was closed again.  There was a hurry, too, in all histhoughts, a turbulent and heated working of his heart, that contendedagainst resignation.  If, for a moment, he did feel resigned, thenhis wife and child who had to live after him, seemed to protest andto make it a selfish thing.But, all this was at first.  Before long, the consideration thatthere was no disgrace in the fate he must meet, and that numbers wentthe same road wrongfully, and trod it firmly every day, sprang up tostimulate him.  Next followed the thought that much of the futurepeace of mind enjoyable by the dear ones, depended on his quietfortitude.  So, by degrees he calmed into the better state, when hecould raise his thoughts much higher, and draw comfort down.Before it had set in dark on the night of his condemnation, he hadtravelled thus far on his last way.  Being allowed to purchase themeans of writing, and a light, he sat down to write until such timeas the prison lamps should be extinguished.He wrote a long letter to Lucie, showing her that he had knownnothing of her father's imprisonment, until he had heard of it fromherself, and that he had been as ignorant as she of his father's anduncle's responsibility for that misery, until the paper had been read.He had already explained to her that his concealment from herself ofthe name he had relinquished, was the one condition--fullyintelligible now--that her father had attached to their betrothal,and was the one promise he had still exacted on the morning of theirmarriage.  He entreated her, for her father's sake, never to seek toknow whether her father had become oblivious of the existence of thepaper, or had had it recalled to him (for the moment, or for good),by the story of the Tower, on that old Sunday under the dear oldplane-tree in the garden.  If he had preserved any definite remembranceof it, there could be no doubt that he had supposed it destroyed withthe Bastille, when he had found no mention of it among the relics ofprisoners which the populace had discovered there, and which had beendescribed to all the world.  He besought her--though he added that heknew it was needless--to console her father, by impressing himthrough every tender means she could think of, with the truth that hehad done nothing for which he could justly reproach himself, but haduniformly forgotten himself for their joint sakes.  Next to herpreservation of his own last grateful love and blessing, and herovercoming of her sorrow, to devote herself to their dear child,he adjured her, as they would meet in Heaven, to comfort her father.To her father himself, he wrote in the same strain; but, he told herfather that he expressly confided his wife and child to his care.And he told him this, very strongly, with the hope of rousing himfrom any despondency or dangerous retrospect towards which he foresawhe might be tending.To Mr. Lorry, he commended them all, and explained his worldly affairs.That done, with many added sentences of grateful friendship and warmattachment, all was done.  He never thought of Carton.  His mind wasso full of the others, that he never once thought of him.He had time to finish these letters before the lights were put out.When he lay down on his straw bed, he thought he had done with this world.But, it beckoned him back in his sleep, and showed itself in shiningforms.  Free and happy, back in the old house in Soho (though it hadnothing in it like the real house), unaccountably released and lightof heart, he was with Lucie again, and she told him it was all a dream,and he had never gone away.  A pause of forgetfulness, and then hehad even suffered, and had come back to her, dead and at peace, and yetthere was no difference in him.  Another pause of oblivion, and heawoke in the sombre morning, unconscious where he was or what hadhappened, until it flashed upon his mind, "this is the day of my death!"Thus, had he come through the hours, to the day when the fifty-twoheads were to fall.  And now, while he was composed, and hoped thathe could meet the end with quiet heroism, a new action began in hiswaking thoughts, which was very difficult to master.He had never seen the instrument that was to terminate his life.How high it was from the ground, how many steps it had, where hewould be stood, how he would be touched, whether the touching handswould be dyed red, which way his face would be turned, whether hewould be the first, or might be the last:  these and many similarquestions, in nowise directed by his will, obtruded themselves overand over again, countless times.  Neither were they connected withfear:  he was conscious of no fear.  Rather, they originated in astrange besetting desire to know what to do when the time came;a desire gigantically disproportionate to the few swift moments towhich it referred; a wondering that was more like the wondering ofsome other spirit within his, than his own.The hours went on as he walked to and fro, and the clocks struck thenumbers he would never hear again.  Nine gone for ever, ten gone forever, eleven gone for ever, twelve coming on to pass away.  After ahard contest with that eccentric action of thought which had lastperplexed him, he had got the better of it.  He walked up and down,softly repeating their names to himself.  The worst of the strife wasover.  He could walk up and down, free from distracting fancies,praying for himself and for them.Twelve gone for ever.He had been apprised that the final hour was Three, and he knew hewould be summoned some time earlier, inasmuch as the tumbrils joltedheavily and slowly through the streets.  Therefore, he resolved to keepTwo before his mind, as the hour, and so to strengthen himself in theinterval that he might be able, after that time, to strengthen others.Walking regularly to and fro with his arms folded on his breast,a very different man from the prisoner, who had walked to and fro atLa Force, he heard One struck away from him, without surprise.The hour had measured like most other hours.  Devoutly thankful toHeaven for his recovered self-possession, he thought, "There is butanother now," and turned to walk again.Footsteps in the stone passage outside the door.  He stopped.The key was put in the lock, and turned.  Before the door was opened,or as it opened, a man said in a low voice, in English:  "He has neverseen me here; I have kept out of his way.  Go you in alone; I wait near.Lose no time!"The door was quickly opened and closed, and there stood before himface to face, quiet, intent upon him, with the light of a smile onhis features, and a cautionary finger on his lip, Sydney Carton.There was something so bright and remarkable in his look, that, forthe first moment, the prisoner misdoubted him to be an apparition ofhis own imagining.  But, he spoke, and it was his voice; he took theprisoner's hand, and it was his real grasp."Of all the people upon earth, you least expected to see me?" he said."I could not believe it to be you.  I can scarcely believe it now.You are not"--the apprehension came suddenly into his mind--"a prisoner?""No.  I am accidentally possessed of a power over one of the keepershere, and in virtue of it I stand before you.  I come from her--yourwife, dear Darnay."The prisoner wrung his hand."I bring you a request from her.""What is it?""A most earnest, pressing, and emphatic entreaty, addressed to you in themost pathetic tones of the voice so dear to you, that you well remember."The prisoner turned his face partly aside."You have no time to ask me why I bring it, or what it means; I haveno time to tell you.  You must comply with it--take off those bootsyou wear, and draw on these of mine."There was a chair against the wall of the cell, behind theprisoner.  Carton, pressing forward, had already, with the speed oflightning, got him down into it, and stood over him, barefoot."Draw on these boots of mine.  Put your hands to them;put your will to them.  Quick!""Carton, there is no escaping from this place; it never can be done.You will only die with me.  It is madness.""It would be madness if I asked you to escape; but do I?  When I askyou to pass out at that door, tell me it is madness and remain here.Change that cravat for this of mine, that coat for this of mine.While you do it, let me take this ribbon from your hair, and shakeout your hair like this of mine!"With wonderful quickness, and with a strength both of will and action,that appeared quite supernatural, he forced all these changes upon him.The prisoner was like a young child in his hands."Carton!  Dear Carton!  It is madness.  It cannot be accomplished,it never can be done, it has been attempted, and has always failed.I implore you not to add your death to the bitterness of mine.""Do I ask you, my dear Darnay, to pass the door?  When I ask that,refuse.  There are pen and ink and paper on this table.  Is your handsteady enough to write?""It was when you came in.""Steady it again, and write what I shall dictate.  Quick, friend, quick!"Pressing his hand to his bewildered head, Darnay sat down at the table.Carton, with his right hand in his breast, stood close beside him."Write exactly as I speak.""To whom do I address it?""To no one."  Carton still had his hand in his breast."Do I date it?""No."The prisoner looked up, at each question.  Carton, standing over himwith his hand in his breast, looked down."`If you remember,'" said Carton, dictating, "`the words that passedbetween us, long ago, you will readily comprehend this when you see it.You do remember them, I know.  It is not in your nature to forget them.'"He was drawing his hand from his breast; the prisoner chancing tolook up in his hurried wonder as he wrote, the hand stopped, closingupon something."Have you written `forget them'?" Carton asked."I have.  Is that a weapon in your hand?""No; I am not armed.""What is it in your hand?""You shall know directly.  Write on; there are but a few words more."He dictated again.  "`I am thankful that the time has come, when Ican prove them.  That I do so is no subject for regret or grief.'"As he said these words with his eyes fixed on the writer, his handslowly and softly moved down close to the writer's face.The pen dropped from Darnay's fingers on the table, and he lookedabout him vacantly."What vapour is that?" he asked."Vapour?""Something that crossed me?""I am conscious of nothing; there can be nothing here.  Take up thepen and finish.  Hurry, hurry!"As if his memory were impaired, or his faculties disordered, theprisoner made an effort to rally his attention.  As he looked atCarton with clouded eyes and with an altered manner of breathing,Carton--his hand again in his breast--looked steadily at him."Hurry, hurry!"The prisoner bent over the paper, once more."`If it had been otherwise;'" Carton's hand was again watchfullyand softly stealing down; "`I never should have used the longeropportunity.  If it had been otherwise;'" the hand was at theprisoner's face; "`I should but have had so much the more to answerfor.  If it had been otherwise--'"  Carton looked at the pen and sawit was trailing off into unintelligible signs.Carton's hand moved back to his breast no more.  The prisoner sprangup with a reproachful look, but Carton's hand was close and firm athis nostrils, and Carton's left arm caught him round the waist.For a few seconds he faintly struggled with the man who had cometo lay down his life for him; but, within a minute or so, he wasstretched insensible on the ground.Quickly, but with hands as true to the purpose as his heart was,Carton dressed himself in the clothes the prisoner had laid aside,combed back his hair, and tied it with the ribbon the prisoner hadworn.  Then, he softly called, "Enter there!  Come in!" and the Spypresented himself."You see?" said Carton, looking up, as he kneeled on one knee besidethe insensible figure, putting the paper in the breast:  "is yourhazard very great?""Mr. Carton," the Spy answered, with a timid snap of his fingers,"my hazard is not _that_, in the thick of business here, if you aretrue to the whole of your bargain.""Don't fear me.  I will be true to the death.""You must be, Mr. Carton, if the tale of fifty-two is to be right.Being made right by you in that dress, I shall have no fear.""Have no fear!  I shall soon be out of the way of harming you, and therest will soon be far from here, please God!  Now, get assistance andtake me to the coach.""You?" said the Spy nervously."Him, man, with whom I have exchanged.  You go out at the gate bywhich you brought me in?""Of course.""I was weak and faint when you brought me in, and I am fainter nowyou take me out.  The parting interview has overpowered me.  Such athing has happened here, often, and too often.  Your life is in yourown hands.  Quick!  Call assistance!""You swear not to betray me?" said the trembling Spy, as he pausedfor a last moment."Man, man!" returned Carton, stamping his foot; "have I sworn by nosolemn vow already, to go through with this, that you waste theprecious moments now?  Take him yourself to the courtyard you know of,place him yourself in the carriage, show him yourself to Mr. Lorry,tell him yourself to give him no restorative but air, and to remembermy words of last night, and his promise of last night, and drive away!"The Spy withdrew, and Carton seated himself at the table, resting hisforehead on his hands.  The Spy returned immediately, with two men."How, then?" said one of them, contemplating the fallen figure.  "Soafflicted to find that his friend has drawn a prize in the lottery ofSainte Guillotine?""A good patriot," said the other, "could hardly have been moreafflicted if the Aristocrat had drawn a blank."They raised the unconscious figure, placed it on a litter they hadbrought to the door, and bent to carry it away."The time is short, Evremonde," said the Spy, in a warning voice."I know it well," answered Carton.  "Be careful of my friend, Ientreat you, and leave me.""Come, then, my children," said Barsad.  "Lift him, and come away!"The door closed, and Carton was left alone.  Straining his powers oflistening to the utmost, he listened for any sound that might denotesuspicion or alarm.  There was none.  Keys turned, doors clashed,footsteps passed along distant passages:  no cry was raised, or hurrymade, that seemed unusual.  Breathing more freely in a little while,he sat down at the table, and listened again until the clock struck Two.Sounds that he was not afraid of, for he divined their meaning, thenbegan to be audible.  Several doors were opened in succession, andfinally his own.  A gaoler, with a list in his hand, looked in,merely saying, "Follow me, Evremonde!" and he followed into a largedark room, at a distance.  It was a dark winter day, and what withthe shadows within, and what with the shadows without, he could butdimly discern the others who were brought there to have their armsbound.  Some were standing; some seated.  Some were lamenting, and inrestless motion; but, these were few.  The great majority were silentand still, looking fixedly at the ground.As he stood by the wall in a dim corner, while some of the fifty-twowere brought in after him, one man stopped in passing, to embracehim, as having a knowledge of him.  It thrilled him with a greatdread of discovery; but the man went on.  A very few moments afterthat, a young woman, with a slight girlish form, a sweet spare facein which there was no vestige of colour, and large widely openedpatient eyes, rose from the seat where he had observed her sitting,and came to speak to him."Citizen Evremonde," she said, touching him with her cold hand."I am a poor little seamstress, who was with you in La Force."He murmured for answer:  "True.  I forget what you were accused of?""Plots.  Though the just Heaven knows that I am innocent of any.Is it likely?  Who would think of plotting with a poor little weakcreature like me?"The forlorn smile with which she said it, so touched him, that tearsstarted from his eyes."I am not afraid to die, Citizen Evremonde, but I have done nothing.I am not unwilling to die, if the Republic which is to do so muchgood to us poor, will profit by my death; but I do not know how thatcan be, Citizen Evremonde.  Such a poor weak little creature!"As the last thing on earth that his heart was to warm and soften to,it warmed and softened to this pitiable girl."I heard you were released, Citizen Evremonde.  I hoped it was true?""It was.  But, I was again taken and condemned.""If I may ride with you, Citizen Evremonde, will you let me hold yourhand?  I am not afraid, but I am little and weak, and it will give memore courage."As the patient eyes were lifted to his face, he saw a sudden doubt inthem, and then astonishment.  He pressed the work-worn, hunger-wornyoung fingers, and touched his lips."Are you dying for him?" she whispered."And his wife and child.  Hush!  Yes.""O you will let me hold your brave hand, stranger?""Hush!  Yes, my poor sister; to the last."        *       *       *The same shadows that are falling on the prison, are falling, in thatsame hour of the early afternoon, on the Barrier with the crowd about it,when a coach going out of Paris drives up to be examined."Who goes here?  Whom have we within?  Papers!"The papers are handed out, and read."Alexandre Manette.  Physician.  French.  Which is he?"This is he; this helpless, inarticulately murmuring, wandering oldman pointed out."Apparently the Citizen-Doctor is not in his right mind?The Revolution-fever will have been too much for him?"Greatly too much for him."Hah!  Many suffer with it.  Lucie.  His daughter.  French.  Which is she?"This is she."Apparently it must be.  Lucie, the wife of Evremonde; is it not?"It is."Hah!  Evremonde has an assignation elsewhere.  Lucie, her child.English.  This is she?"She and no other."Kiss me, child of Evremonde.  Now, thou hast kissed a goodRepublican; something new in thy family; remember it!  Sydney Carton.Advocate.  English.  Which is he?"He lies here, in this corner of the carriage.  He, too, is pointed out."Apparently the English advocate is in a swoon?"It is hoped he will recover in the fresher air.  It is representedthat he is not in strong health, and has separated sadly from afriend who is under the displeasure of the Republic."Is that all?  It is not a great deal, that!  Many are under thedispleasure of the Republic, and must look out at the little window.Jarvis Lorry.  Banker.  English.  Which is he?""I am he.  Necessarily, being the last."It is Jarvis Lorry who has replied to all the previous questions.It is Jarvis Lorry who has alighted and stands with his hand on thecoach door, replying to a group of officials.  They leisurely walkround the carriage and leisurely mount the box, to look at whatlittle luggage it carries on the roof; the country-people hangingabout, press nearer to the coach doors and greedily stare in; alittle child, carried by its mother, has its short arm held out forit, that it may touch the wife of an aristocrat who has gone to theGuillotine."Behold your papers, Jarvis Lorry, countersigned.""One can depart, citizen?""One can depart.  Forward, my postilions!  A good journey!""I salute you, citizens.--And the first danger passed!"These are again the words of Jarvis Lorry, as he clasps his hands,and looks upward.  There is terror in the carriage, there is weeping,there is the heavy breathing of the insensible traveller."Are we not going too slowly?  Can they not be induced to go faster?"asks Lucie, clinging to the old man."It would seem like flight, my darling.  I must not urge them too much;it would rouse suspicion.""Look back, look back, and see if we are pursued!""The road is clear, my dearest.  So far, we are not pursued."Houses in twos and threes pass by us, solitary farms, ruinousbuildings, dye-works, tanneries, and the like, open country, avenuesof leafless trees.  The hard uneven pavement is under us, the softdeep mud is on either side.  Sometimes, we strike into the skirtingmud, to avoid the stones that clatter us and shake us; sometimes, westick in ruts and sloughs there.  The agony of our impatience is thenso great, that in our wild alarm and hurry we are for getting out andrunning--hiding--doing anything but stopping.Out of the open country, in again among ruinous buildings, solitaryfarms, dye-works, tanneries, and the like, cottages in twos andthrees, avenues of leafless trees.  Have these men deceived us, andtaken us back by another road?  Is not this the same place twice over?Thank Heaven, no.  A village.  Look back, look back, and see if we arepursued!  Hush! the posting-house.Leisurely, our four horses are taken out; leisurely, the coach standsin the little street, bereft of horses, and with no likelihood uponit of ever moving again; leisurely, the new horses come into visibleexistence, one by one; leisurely, the new postilions follow, suckingand plaiting the lashes of their whips; leisurely, the old postilionscount their money, make wrong additions, and arrive at dissatisfiedresults.  All the time, our overfraught hearts are beating at a ratethat would far outstrip the fastest gallop of the fastest horses everfoaled.At length the new postilions are in their saddles, and the old areleft behind.  We are through the village, up the hill, and down thehill, and on the low watery grounds.  Suddenly, the postilionsexchange speech with animated gesticulation, and the horses arepulled up, almost on their haunches.  We are pursued?"Ho!  Within the carriage there.  Speak then!""What is it?" asks Mr. Lorry, looking out at window."How many did they say?""I do not understand you.""--At the last post.  How many to the Guillotine to-day?""Fifty-two.""I said so!  A brave number!  My fellow-citizen here would have itforty-two; ten more heads are worth having.  The Guillotine goeshandsomely.  I love it.  Hi forward.  Whoop!"The night comes on dark.  He moves more; he is beginning to revive,and to speak intelligibly; he thinks they are still together; he askshim, by his name, what he has in his hand.  O pity us, kind Heaven,and help us!  Look out, look out, and see if we are pursued.The wind is rushing after us, and the clouds are flying after us, andthe moon is plunging after us, and the whole wild night is in pursuitof us; but, so far, we are pursued by nothing else.XIVThe Knitting DoneIn that same juncture of time when the Fifty-Two awaited their fateMadame Defarge held darkly ominous council with The Vengeance andJacques Three of the Revolutionary Jury.  Not in the wine-shop didMadame Defarge confer with these ministers, but in the shed of thewood-sawyer, erst a mender of roads.  The sawyer himself did notparticipate in the conference, but abided at a little distance,like an outer satellite who was not to speak until required, or tooffer an opinion until invited."But our Defarge," said Jacques Three, "is undoubtedly a goodRepublican?  Eh?""There is no better," the voluble Vengeance protested in her shrillnotes, "in France.""Peace, little Vengeance," said Madame Defarge, laying her hand witha slight frown on her lieutenant's lips, "hear me speak.  My husband,fellow-citizen, is a good Republican and a bold man; he has deservedwell of the Republic, and possesses its confidence.  But my husbandhas his weaknesses, and he is so weak as to relent towards this Doctor.""It is a great pity," croaked Jacques Three, dubiously shaking hishead, with his cruel fingers at his hungry mouth; "it is not quitelike a good citizen; it is a thing to regret.""See you," said madame, "I care nothing for this Doctor, I.  He maywear his head or lose it, for any interest I have in him; it is allone to me.  But, the Evremonde people are to be exterminated, and thewife and child must follow the husband and father.""She has a fine head for it," croaked Jacques Three.  "I have seenblue eyes and golden hair there, and they looked charming when Samsonheld them up."  Ogre that he was, he spoke like an epicure.Madame Defarge cast down her eyes, and reflected a little."The child also," observed Jacques Three, with a meditative enjoymentof his words, "has golden hair and blue eyes.  And we seldom have achild there.  It is a pretty sight!""In a word," said Madame Defarge, coming out of her short abstraction,"I cannot trust my husband in this matter.  Not only do I feel, sincelast night, that I dare not confide to him the details of my projects;but also I feel that if I delay, there is danger of his giving warning,and then they might escape.""That must never be," croaked Jacques Three; "no one must escape.We have not half enough as it is.  We ought to have six score a day.""In a word," Madame Defarge went on, "my husband has not my reasonfor pursuing this family to annihilation, and I have not his reasonfor regarding this Doctor with any sensibility.  I must act for myself,therefore.  Come hither, little citizen."The wood-sawyer, who held her in the respect, and himself in thesubmission, of mortal fear, advanced with his hand to his red cap."Touching those signals, little citizen," said Madame Defarge,sternly, "that she made to the prisoners; you are ready to bearwitness to them this very day?""Ay, ay, why not!" cried the sawyer.  "Every day, in all weathers,from two to four, always signalling, sometimes with the little one,sometimes without.  I know what I know.  I have seen with my eyes."He made all manner of gestures while he spoke, as if in incidentalimitation of some few of the great diversity of signals that he hadnever seen."Clearly plots," said Jacques Three.  "Transparently!""There is no doubt of the Jury?" inquired Madame Defarge, letting hereyes turn to him with a gloomy smile."Rely upon the patriotic Jury, dear citizeness.  I answer for myfellow-Jurymen.""Now, let me see," said Madame Defarge, pondering again.  "Yet once more!Can I spare this Doctor to my husband?  I have no feeling either way.Can I spare him?""He would count as one head," observed Jacques Three, in a low voice."We really have not heads enough; it would be a pity, I think.""He was signalling with her when I saw her," argued Madame Defarge;"I cannot speak of one without the other; and I must not be silent,and trust the case wholly to him, this little citizen here.For, I am not a bad witness."The Vengeance and Jacques Three vied with each other in their ferventprotestations that she was the most admirable and marvellous ofwitnesses.  The little citizen, not to be outdone, declared her to bea celestial witness."He must take his chance," said Madame Defarge.  "No, I cannot sparehim!  You are engaged at three o'clock; you are going to see the batchof to-day executed.--You?"The question was addressed to the wood-sawyer, who hurriedly repliedin the affirmative:  seizing the occasion to add that he was the mostardent of Republicans, and that he would be in effect the mostdesolate of Republicans, if anything prevented him from enjoying thepleasure of smoking his afternoon pipe in the contemplation of thedroll national barber.  He was so very demonstrative herein, that hemight have been suspected (perhaps was, by the dark eyes that lookedcontemptuously at him out of Madame Defarge's head) of having his smallindividual fears for his own personal safety, every hour in the day."I," said madame, "am equally engaged at the same place.  After it isover--say at eight to-night--come you to me, in Saint Antoine, and wewill give information against these people at my Section."The wood-sawyer said he would be proud and flattered to attend thecitizeness.  The citizeness looking at him, he became embarrassed,evaded her glance as a small dog would have done, retreated amonghis wood, and hid his confusion over the handle of his saw.Madame Defarge beckoned the Juryman and The Vengeance a little nearerto the door, and there expounded her further views to them thus:"She will now be at home, awaiting the moment of his death.  She willbe mourning and grieving.  She will be in a state of mind to impeachthe justice of the Republic.  She will be full of sympathy with itsenemies.  I will go to her.""What an admirable woman; what an adorable woman!" exclaimedJacques Three, rapturously.  "Ah, my cherished!" cried The Vengeance;and embraced her."Take you my knitting," said Madame Defarge, placing it in herlieutenant's hands, "and have it ready for me in my usual seat.Keep me my usual chair.  Go you there, straight, for there willprobably be a greater concourse than usual, to-day.""I willingly obey the orders of my Chief," said The Vengeance withalacrity, and kissing her cheek.  "You will not be late?""I shall be there before the commencement.""And before the tumbrils arrive.  Be sure you are there, my soul,"said The Vengeance, calling after her, for she had already turnedinto the street, "before the tumbrils arrive!"Madame Defarge slightly waved her hand, to imply that she heard, andmight be relied upon to arrive in good time, and so went through themud, and round the corner of the prison wall.  The Vengeance and theJuryman, looking after her as she walked away, were highly appreciativeof her fine figure, and her superb moral endowments.There were many women at that time, upon whom the time laid adreadfully disfiguring hand; but, there was not one among them moreto be dreaded than this ruthless woman, now taking her way along thestreets.  Of a strong and fearless character, of shrewd sense andreadiness, of great determination, of that kind of beauty which notonly seems to impart to its possessor firmness and animosity, but tostrike into others an instinctive recognition of those qualities; thetroubled time would have heaved her up, under any circumstances.But, imbued from her childhood with a brooding sense of wrong, and aninveterate hatred of a class, opportunity had developed her into atigress.  She was absolutely without pity.  If she had ever had thevirtue in her, it had quite gone out of her.It was nothing to her, that an innocent man was to die for the sinsof his forefathers; she saw, not him, but them.  It was nothing to her,that his wife was to be made a widow and his daughter an orphan; thatwas insufficient punishment, because they were her natural enemiesand her prey, and as such had no right to live.  To appeal to her,was made hopeless by her having no sense of pity, even for herself.If she had been laid low in the streets, in any of the many encountersin which she had been engaged, she would not have pitied herself;nor, if she had been ordered to the axe to-morrow, would she havegone to it with any softer feeling than a fierce desire to changeplaces with the man who sent here there.Such a heart Madame Defarge carried under her rough robe.  Carelesslyworn, it was a becoming robe enough, in a certain weird way, and herdark hair looked rich under her coarse red cap.  Lying hidden in herbosom, was a loaded pistol.  Lying hidden at her waist, was a sharpeneddagger.  Thus accoutred, and walking with the confident tread of sucha character, and with the supple freedom of a woman who had habituallywalked in her girlhood, bare-foot and bare-legged, on the brownsea-sand, Madame Defarge took her way along the streets.Now, when the journey of the travelling coach, at that very momentwaiting for the completion of its load, had been planned out lastnight, the difficulty of taking Miss Pross in it had much engagedMr. Lorry's attention.  It was not merely desirable to avoidoverloading the coach, but it was of the highest importance that thetime occupied in examining it and its passengers, should be reducedto the utmost; since their escape might depend on the saving of onlya few seconds here and there.  Finally, he had proposed, after anxiousconsideration, that Miss Pross and Jerry, who were at liberty toleave the city, should leave it at three o'clock in the lightest-wheeled conveyance known to that period.  Unencumbered with luggage,they would soon overtake the coach, and, passing it and preceding iton the road, would order its horses in advance, and greatly facilitateits progress during the precious hours of the night, when delay wasthe most to be dreaded.Seeing in this arrangement the hope of rendering real service in thatpressing emergency, Miss Pross hailed it with joy.  She and Jerry hadbeheld the coach start, had known who it was that Solomon brought,had passed some ten minutes in tortures of suspense, and were nowconcluding their arrangements to follow the coach, even as MadameDefarge, taking her way through the streets, now drew nearer andnearer to the else-deserted lodging in which they held their consultation."Now what do you think, Mr. Cruncher," said Miss Pross, whoseagitation was so great that she could hardly speak, or stand,or move, or live:  "what do you think of our not starting from thiscourtyard?  Another carriage having already gone from here to-day,it might awaken suspicion.""My opinion, miss," returned Mr. Cruncher, "is as you're right.Likewise wot I'll stand by you, right or wrong.""I am so distracted with fear and hope for our precious creatures,"said Miss Pross, wildly crying, "that I am incapable of forming anyplan.  Are _you_ capable of forming any plan, my dear good Mr. Cruncher?""Respectin' a future spear o' life, miss," returned Mr. Cruncher,"I hope so.  Respectin' any present use o' this here blessed old heado' mine, I think not.  Would you do me the favour, miss, to takenotice o' two promises and wows wot it is my wishes fur to record inthis here crisis?""Oh, for gracious sake!" cried Miss Pross, still wildly crying,"record them at once, and get them out of the way, like an excellent man.""First," said Mr. Cruncher, who was all in a tremble, and who spokewith an ashy and solemn visage, "them poor things well out o' this,never no more will I do it, never no more!""I am quite sure, Mr. Cruncher," returned Miss Pross, "that you neverwill do it again, whatever it is, and I beg you not to think itnecessary to mention more particularly what it is.""No, miss," returned Jerry, "it shall not be named to you.  Second:them poor things well out o' this, and never no more will I interferewith Mrs. Cruncher's flopping, never no more!""Whatever housekeeping arrangement that may be," said Miss Pross,striving to dry her eyes and compose herself, "I have no doubt itis best that Mrs. Cruncher should have it entirely under her ownsuperintendence.--O my poor darlings!""I go so far as to say, miss, moreover," proceeded Mr. Cruncher, witha most alarming tendency to hold forth as from a pulpit--"and let mywords be took down and took to Mrs. Cruncher through yourself--thatwot my opinions respectin' flopping has undergone a change, and thatwot I only hope with all my heart as Mrs. Cruncher may be a floppingat the present time.""There, there, there!  I hope she is, my dear man," cried the distractedMiss Pross, "and I hope she finds it answering her expectations.""Forbid it," proceeded Mr. Cruncher, with additional solemnity,additional slowness, and additional tendency to hold forth and holdout, "as anything wot I have ever said or done should be wisited onmy earnest wishes for them poor creeturs now!  Forbid it as we shouldn'tall flop (if it was anyways conwenient) to get 'em out o' this heredismal risk!  Forbid it, miss!  Wot I say, for-_bid_ it!"  This wasMr. Cruncher's conclusion after a protracted but vain endeavourto find a better one.And still Madame Defarge, pursuing her way along the streets, camenearer and nearer."If we ever get back to our native land," said Miss Pross, "you mayrely upon my telling Mrs. Cruncher as much as I may be able to rememberand understand of what you have so impressively said; and at allevents you may be sure that I shall bear witness to your beingthoroughly in earnest at this dreadful time.  Now, pray let us think!My esteemed Mr. Cruncher, let us think!"Still, Madame Defarge, pursuing her way along the streets, camenearer and nearer."If you were to go before," said Miss Pross, "and stop the vehicleand horses from coming here, and were to wait somewhere for me;wouldn't that be best?"Mr. Cruncher thought it might be best."Where could you wait for me?" asked Miss Pross.Mr. Cruncher was so bewildered that he could think of no locality butTemple Bar.  Alas!  Temple Bar was hundreds of miles away, and MadameDefarge was drawing very near indeed."By the cathedral door," said Miss Pross.  "Would it be much out of theway, to take me in, near the great cathedral door between the two towers?""No, miss," answered Mr. Cruncher."Then, like the best of men," said Miss Pross, "go to the posting-house straight, and make that change.""I am doubtful," said Mr. Cruncher, hesitating and shaking his head,"about leaving of you, you see.  We don't know what may happen.""Heaven knows we don't," returned Miss Pross, "but have no fear forme.  Take me in at the cathedral, at Three o'Clock, or as near it asyou can, and I am sure it will be better than our going from here.I feel certain of it.  There!  Bless you, Mr. Cruncher!  Think-not ofme, but of the lives that may depend on both of us!"This exordium, and Miss Pross's two hands in quite agonised entreatyclasping his, decided Mr. Cruncher.  With an encouraging nod or two,he immediately went out to alter the arrangements, and left her byherself to follow as she had proposed.The having originated a precaution which was already in course ofexecution, was a great relief to Miss Pross.  The necessity ofcomposing her appearance so that it should attract no special noticein the streets, was another relief.  She looked at her watch, and itwas twenty minutes past two.  She had no time to lose, but must getready at once.Afraid, in her extreme perturbation, of the loneliness of thedeserted rooms, and of half-imagined faces peeping from behind everyopen door in them, Miss Pross got a basin of cold water and beganlaving her eyes, which were swollen and red.  Haunted by her feverishapprehensions, she could not bear to have her sight obscured for aminute at a time by the dripping water, but constantly paused andlooked round to see that there was no one watching her.  In one ofthose pauses she recoiled and cried out, for she saw a figurestanding in the room.The basin fell to the ground broken, and the water flowed to the feetof Madame Defarge.  By strange stern ways, and through much stainingblood, those feet had come to meet that water.Madame Defarge looked coldly at her, and said, "The wife of Evremonde;where is she?"It flashed upon Miss Pross's mind that the doors were all standingopen, and would suggest the flight.  Her first act was to shut them.There were four in the room, and she shut them all.  She then placedherself before the door of the chamber which Lucie had occupied.Madame Defarge's dark eyes followed her through this rapid movement,and rested on her when it was finished.  Miss Pross had nothingbeautiful about her; years had not tamed the wildness, or softenedthe grimness, of her appearance; but, she too was a determined womanin her different way, and she measured Madame Defarge with her eyes,every inch."You might, from your appearance, be the wife of Lucifer," said MissPross, in her breathing.  "Nevertheless, you shall not get the betterof me.  I am an Englishwoman."Madame Defarge looked at her scornfully, but still with something ofMiss Pross's own perception that they two were at bay.  She saw atight, hard, wiry woman before her, as Mr. Lorry had seen in the samefigure a woman with a strong hand, in the years gone by.  She knewfull well that Miss Pross was the family's devoted friend; Miss Prossknew full well that Madame Defarge was the family's malevolent enemy."On my way yonder," said Madame Defarge, with a slight movement ofher hand towards the fatal spot, "where they reserve my chair and myknitting for me, I am come to make my compliments to her in passing.I wish to see her.""I know that your intentions are evil," said Miss Pross, "and you maydepend upon it, I'll hold my own against them."Each spoke in her own language; neither understood the other's words;both were very watchful, and intent to deduce from look and manner,what the unintelligible words meant."It will do her no good to keep herself concealed from me at thismoment," said Madame Defarge.  "Good patriots will know what that means.Let me see her.  Go tell her that I wish to see her.  Do you hear?""If those eyes of yours were bed-winches," returned Miss Pross, "andI was an English four-poster, they shouldn't loose a splinter of me.No, you wicked foreign woman; I am your match."Madame Defarge was not likely to follow these idiomatic remarks indetail; but, she so far understood them as to perceive that she wasset at naught."Woman imbecile and pig-like!" said Madame Defarge, frowning."I take no answer from you.  I demand to see her.  Either tell herthat I demand to see her, or stand out of the way of the door and letme go to her!"  This, with an angry explanatory wave of her right arm."I little thought," said Miss Pross, "that I should ever want tounderstand your nonsensical language; but I would give all I have,except the clothes I wear, to know whether you suspect the truth, orany part of it."Neither of them for a single moment released the other's eyes.Madame Defarge had not moved from the spot where she stood when MissPross first became aware of her; but, she now advanced one step."I am a Briton," said Miss Pross, "I am desperate.  I don't care anEnglish Twopence for myself.  I know that the longer I keep you here,the greater hope there is for my Ladybird.  I'll not leave a handfulof that dark hair upon your head, if you lay a finger on me!"Thus Miss Pross, with a shake of her head and a flash of her eyesbetween every rapid sentence, and every rapid sentence a whole breath.Thus Miss Pross, who had never struck a blow in her life.But, her courage was of that emotional nature that it brought theirrepressible tears into her eyes.  This was a courage that MadameDefarge so little comprehended as to mistake for weakness.  "Ha, ha!"she laughed, "you poor wretch!  What are you worth!  I address myselfto that Doctor."  Then she raised her voice and called out, "CitizenDoctor!  Wife of Evremonde!  Child of Evremonde!  Any person but thismiserable fool, answer the Citizeness Defarge!"Perhaps the following silence, perhaps some latent disclosure in theexpression of Miss Pross's face, perhaps a sudden misgiving apart fromeither suggestion, whispered to Madame Defarge that they were gone.Three of the doors she opened swiftly, and looked in."Those rooms are all in disorder, there has been hurried packing,there are odds and ends upon the ground.  There is no one in thatroom behind you!  Let me look.""Never!" said Miss Pross, who understood the request as perfectly asMadame Defarge understood the answer."If they are not in that room, they are gone, and can be pursued andbrought back," said Madame Defarge to herself."As long as you don't know whether they are in that room or not, youare uncertain what to do," said Miss Pross to herself; "and you shallnot know that, if I can prevent your knowing it; and know that, ornot know that, you shall not leave here while I can hold you.""I have been in the streets from the first, nothing has stopped me,I will tear you to pieces, but I will have you from that door," saidMadame Defarge."We are alone at the top of a high house in a solitary courtyard,we are not likely to be heard, and I pray for bodily strength to keepyou here, while every minute you are here is worth a hundred thousandguineas to my darling," said Miss Pross.Madame Defarge made at the door.  Miss Pross, on the instinct of themoment, seized her round the waist in both her arms, and held hertight.  It was in vain for Madame Defarge to struggle and to strike;Miss Pross, with the vigorous tenacity of love, always so muchstronger than hate, clasped her tight, and even lifted her from thefloor in the struggle that they had.  The two hands of Madame Defargebuffeted and tore her face; but, Miss Pross, with her head down, heldher round the waist, and clung to her with more than the hold of adrowning woman.Soon, Madame Defarge's hands ceased to strike, and felt at herencircled waist.  "It is under my arm," said Miss Pross, in smotheredtones, "you shall not draw it.  I am stronger than you, I blessHeaven for it.  I hold you till one or other of us faints or dies!"Madame Defarge's hands were at her bosom.  Miss Pross looked up, sawwhat it was, struck at it, struck out a flash and a crash, and stoodalone--blinded with smoke.All this was in a second.  As the smoke cleared, leaving an awfulstillness, it passed out on the air, like the soul of the furiouswoman whose body lay lifeless on the ground.In the first fright and horror of her situation, Miss Pross passedthe body as far from it as she could, and ran down the stairs to callfor fruitless help.  Happily, she bethought herself of theconsequences of what she did, in time to check herself and go back.It was dreadful to go in at the door again; but, she did go in, andeven went near it, to get the bonnet and other things that she mustwear.  These she put on, out on the staircase, first shutting andlocking the door and taking away the key.  She then sat down on thestairs a few moments to breathe and to cry, and then got up andhurried away.By good fortune she had a veil on her bonnet, or she could hardlyhave gone along the streets without being stopped.  By good fortune,too, she was naturally so peculiar in appearance as not to showdisfigurement like any other woman.  She needed both advantages, forthe marks of gripping fingers were deep in her face, and her hair wastorn, and her dress (hastily composed with unsteady hands) wasclutched and dragged a hundred ways.In crossing the bridge, she dropped the door key in the river.Arriving at the cathedral some few minutes before her escort, andwaiting there, she thought, what if the key were already taken in anet, what if it were identified, what if the door were opened and theremains discovered, what if she were stopped at the gate, sent toprison, and charged with murder!  In the midst of these flutteringthoughts, the escort appeared, took her in, and took her away."Is there any noise in the streets?" she asked him."The usual noises," Mr. Cruncher replied; and looked surprised by thequestion and by her aspect."I don't hear you," said Miss Pross.  "What do you say?"It was in vain for Mr. Cruncher to repeat what he said; Miss Prosscould not hear him.  "So I'll nod my head," thought Mr. Cruncher,amazed, "at all events she'll see that."  And she did."Is there any noise in the streets now?" asked Miss Pross again,presently.Again Mr. Cruncher nodded his head."I don't hear it.""Gone deaf in an hour?" said Mr. Cruncher, ruminating, with his mindmuch disturbed; "wot's come to her?""I feel," said Miss Pross, "as if there had been a flash and a crash,and that crash was the last thing I should ever hear in this life.""Blest if she ain't in a queer condition!" said Mr. Cruncher, moreand more disturbed.  "Wot can she have been a takin', to keep hercourage up?  Hark!  There's the roll of them dreadful carts!  You canhear that, miss?""I can hear," said Miss Pross, seeing that he spoke to her,"nothing.  O, my good man, there was first a great crash, and then agreat stillness, and that stillness seems to be fixed andunchangeable, never to be broken any more as long as my life lasts.""If she don't hear the roll of those dreadful carts, now very nightheir journey's end," said Mr. Cruncher, glancing over his shoulder,"it's my opinion that indeed she never will hear anything else inthis world."And indeed she never did.XVThe Footsteps Die Out For EverAlong the Paris streets, the death-carts rumble, hollow and harsh.Six tumbrils carry the day's wine to La Guillotine.  All thedevouring and insatiate Monsters imagined since imagination couldrecord itself, are fused in the one realisation, Guillotine.  And yetthere is not in France, with its rich variety of soil and climate,a blade, a leaf, a root, a sprig, a peppercorn, which will grow tomaturity under conditions more certain than those that have producedthis horror.  Crush humanity out of shape once more, under similarhammers, and it will twist itself into the same tortured forms.Sow the same seed of rapacious license and oppression over again,and it will surely yield the same fruit according to its kind.Six tumbrils roll along the streets.  Change these back again to whatthey were, thou powerful enchanter, Time, and they shall be seen tobe the carriages of absolute monarchs, the equipages of feudal nobles,the toilettes of flaring Jezebels, the churches that are not myfather's house but dens of thieves, the huts of millions of starvingpeasants!  No; the great magician who majestically works out theappointed order of the Creator, never reverses his transformations."If thou be changed into this shape by the will of God," say theseers to the enchanted, in the wise Arabian stories, "then remain so!But, if thou wear this form through mere passing conjuration, then resumethy former aspect!"  Changeless and hopeless, the tumbrils roll along.As the sombre wheels of the six carts go round, they seem to ploughup a long crooked furrow among the populace in the streets.  Ridgesof faces are thrown to this side and to that, and the ploughs gosteadily onward.  So used are the regular inhabitants of the housesto the spectacle, that in many windows there are no people,and in some the occupation of the hands is not so much as suspended,while the eyes survey the faces in the tumbrils.  Here and there,the inmate has visitors to see the sight; then he points his finger,with something of the complacency of a curator or authorised exponent,to this cart and to this, and seems to tell who sat here yesterday,and who there the day before.Of the riders in the tumbrils, some observe these things, and allthings on their last roadside, with an impassive stare; others, witha lingering interest in the ways of life and men.  Some, seated withdrooping heads, are sunk in silent despair; again, there are some soheedful of their looks that they cast upon the multitude such glancesas they have seen in theatres, and in pictures.  Several close theireyes, and think, or try to get their straying thoughts together.Only one, and he a miserable creature, of a crazed aspect, is soshattered and made drunk by horror, that he sings, and tries todance.  Not one of the whole number appeals by look or gesture, tothe pity of the people.There is a guard of sundry horsemen riding abreast of the tumbrils,and faces are often turned up to some of them, and they are askedsome question.  It would seem to be always the same question, for,it is always followed by a press of people towards the third cart.The horsemen abreast of that cart, frequently point out one man in itwith their swords.  The leading curiosity is, to know which is he;he stands at the back of the tumbril with his head bent down,to converse with a mere girl who sits on the side of the cart,and holds his hand.  He has no curiosity or care for the scene about him,and always speaks to the girl.  Here and there in the long streetof St. Honore, cries are raised against him.  If they move him at all,it is only to a quiet smile, as he shakes his hair a little moreloosely about his face.  He cannot easily touch his face, his armsbeing bound.On the steps of a church, awaiting the coming-up of the tumbrils,stands the Spy and prison-sheep.  He looks into the first of them:not there.  He looks into the second:  not there.  He already askshimself, "Has he sacrificed me?" when his face clears, as he looksinto the third."Which is Evremonde?" says a man behind him."That.  At the back there.""With his hand in the girl's?""Yes."The man cries, "Down, Evremonde!  To the Guillotine all aristocrats!Down, Evremonde!""Hush, hush!" the Spy entreats him, timidly."And why not, citizen?""He is going to pay the forfeit:  it will be paid in five minutes more.Let him be at peace."But the man continuing to exclaim, "Down, Evremonde!" the face ofEvremonde is for a moment turned towards him.  Evremonde then seesthe Spy, and looks attentively at him, and goes his way.The clocks are on the stroke of three, and the furrow ploughed amongthe populace is turning round, to come on into the place of execution,and end.  The ridges thrown to this side and to that, now crumble inand close behind the last plough as it passes on, for all are followingto the Guillotine.  In front of it, seated in chairs, as in a gardenof public diversion, are a number of women, busily knitting.  On oneof the fore-most chairs, stands The Vengeance, looking about for herfriend."Therese!" she cries, in her shrill tones.  "Who has seen her?Therese Defarge!""She never missed before," says a knitting-woman of the sisterhood."No; nor will she miss now," cries The Vengeance, petulantly."Therese.""Louder," the woman recommends.Ay!  Louder, Vengeance, much louder, and still she will scarcely hearthee.  Louder yet, Vengeance, with a little oath or so added, and yetit will hardly bring her.  Send other women up and down to seek her,lingering somewhere; and yet, although the messengers have done dreaddeeds, it is questionable whether of their own wills they will go farenough to find her!"Bad Fortune!" cries The Vengeance, stamping her foot in the chair,"and here are the tumbrils!  And Evremonde will be despatched in awink, and she not here!  See her knitting in my hand, and her emptychair ready for her.  I cry with vexation and disappointment!"As The Vengeance descends from her elevation to do it, the tumbrilsbegin to discharge their loads.  The ministers of Sainte Guillotineare robed and ready.  Crash!--A head is held up, and the knitting-women who scarcely lifted their eyes to look at it a moment ago whenit could think and speak, count One.The second tumbril empties and moves on; the third comes up.  Crash!--And the knitting-women, never faltering or pausing in their Work,count Two.The supposed Evremonde descends, and the seamstress is lifted outnext after him.  He has not relinquished her patient hand in gettingout, but still holds it as he promised.  He gently places her withher back to the crashing engine that constantly whirrs up and falls,and she looks into his face and thanks him."But for you, dear stranger, I should not be so composed, for I amnaturally a poor little thing, faint of heart; nor should I have beenable to raise my thoughts to Him who was put to death, that we mighthave hope and comfort here to-day.  I think you were sent to me by Heaven.""Or you to me," says Sydney Carton.  "Keep your eyes upon me, dear child,and mind no other object.""I mind nothing while I hold your hand.  I shall mind nothing whenI let it go, if they are rapid.""They will be rapid.  Fear not!"The two stand in the fast-thinning throng of victims, but they speakas if they were alone.  Eye to eye, voice to voice, hand to hand,heart to heart, these two children of the Universal Mother, else sowide apart and differing, have come together on the dark highway,to repair home together, and to rest in her bosom."Brave and generous friend, will you let me ask you one lastquestion?  I am very ignorant, and it troubles me--just a little.""Tell me what it is.""I have a cousin, an only relative and an orphan, like myself, whom Ilove very dearly.  She is five years younger than I, and she lives ina farmer's house in the south country.  Poverty parted us, and sheknows nothing of my fate--for I cannot write--and if I could, howshould I tell her!  It is better as it is.""Yes, yes:  better as it is.""What I have been thinking as we came along, and what I am stillthinking now, as I look into your kind strong face which gives me somuch support, is this:--If the Republic really does good to the poor,and they come to be less hungry, and in all ways to suffer less, shemay live a long time:  she may even live to be old.""What then, my gentle sister?""Do you think:" the uncomplaining eyes in which there is so muchendurance, fill with tears, and the lips part a little more andtremble:  "that it will seem long to me, while I wait for her in thebetter land where I trust both you and I will be mercifully sheltered?""It cannot be, my child; there is no Time there, and no troublethere.""You comfort me so much!  I am so ignorant.  Am I to kiss you now?Is the moment come?""Yes."She kisses his lips; he kisses hers; they solemnly bless each other.The spare hand does not tremble as he releases it; nothing worse thana sweet, bright constancy is in the patient face.  She goes nextbefore him--is gone; the knitting-women count Twenty-Two."I am the Resurrection and the Life, saith the Lord:he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live:and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die."The murmuring of many voices, the upturning of many faces,the pressing on of many footsteps in the outskirts of the crowd,so that it swells forward in a mass, like one great heave of water,all flashes away.  Twenty-Three.        *       *       *They said of him, about the city that night, that it was thepeacefullest man's face ever beheld there.  Many added that he lookedsublime and prophetic.One of the most remarkable sufferers by the same axe--a woman--hadasked at the foot of the same scaffold, not long before, to beallowed to write down the thoughts that were inspiring her.  If hehad given any utterance to his, and they were prophetic, they wouldhave been these:"I see Barsad, and Cly, Defarge, The Vengeance, the Juryman, theJudge, long ranks of the new oppressors who have risen on thedestruction of the old, perishing by this retributive instrument,before it shall cease out of its present use.  I see a beautiful cityand a brilliant people rising from this abyss, and, in their strugglesto be truly free, in their triumphs and defeats, through long yearsto come, I see the evil of this time and of the previous time ofwhich this is the natural birth, gradually making expiation foritself and wearing out."I see the lives for which I lay down my life, peaceful, useful,prosperous and happy, in that England which I shall see no more.I see Her with a child upon her bosom, who bears my name.  I see herfather, aged and bent, but otherwise restored, and faithful to allmen in his healing office, and at peace.  I see the good old man, solong their friend, in ten years' time enriching them with all he has,and passing tranquilly to his reward."I see that I hold a sanctuary in their hearts, and in the hearts oftheir descendants, generations hence.  I see her, an old woman,weeping for me on the anniversary of this day.  I see her and herhusband, their course done, lying side by side in their last earthlybed, and I know that each was not more honoured and held sacred inthe other's soul, than I was in the souls of both."I see that child who lay upon her bosom and who bore my name, a manwinning his way up in that path of life which once was mine.  I seehim winning it so well, that my name is made illustrious there by thelight of his.  I see the blots I threw upon it, faded away.  I seehim, fore-most of just judges and honoured men, bringing a boy of myname, with a forehead that I know and golden hair, to this place--then fair to look upon, with not a trace of this day's disfigurement--and I hear him tell the child my story, with a tender and a falteringvoice."It is a far, far better thing that I do, than I have ever done;it is a far, far better rest that I go to than I have ever known."End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Tale of Two Cities, by Charles Dickens*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A TALE OF TWO CITIES ******** This file should be named 98.txt or 98.zip *****This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:        http://www.gutenberg.net/9/98/This etext was created by Judith Boss, Omaha, Nebraska.  Theequipment: an IBM-compatible 486/50, a Hewlett-Packard ScanJetIIc flatbed scanner, and a copy of Calera Recognition Systems'M/600 Series Professional OCR software and RISC acceleratorboard donated by Calera.Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editionswill be renamed.Creating the works from public domain print editions means that noone owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States withoutpermission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply tocopying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works toprotect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  ProjectGutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if youcharge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If youdo not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with therules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purposesuch as creation of derivative works, reports, performances andresearch.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may dopractically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution issubject to the trademark license, especially commercialredistribution.*** START: FULL LICENSE ***THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "ProjectGutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full ProjectGutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online athttp://gutenberg.net/license).Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroyall copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by theterms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person orentity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  Seeparagraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreementand help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronicworks.  See paragraph 1.E below.1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in thecollection are in the public domain in the United States.  If anindividual work is in the public domain in the United States and you arelocated in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you fromcopying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivativeworks based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenbergare removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the ProjectGutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works byfreely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms ofthis agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated withthe work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement bykeeping this work in the same format with its attached full ProjectGutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are ina constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, checkthe laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreementbefore downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing orcreating derivative works based on this work or any other ProjectGutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerningthe copyright status of any work in any country outside the UnitedStates.1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediateaccess to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominentlywhenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which thephrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "ProjectGutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,copied or distributed:This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derivedfrom the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it isposted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copiedand distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any feesor charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a workwith the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on thework, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and theProject Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or1.E.9.1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additionalterms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linkedto the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with thepermission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tmLicense terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg-tm License.1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including anyword processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to ordistribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official versionposted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide acopy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy uponrequest, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or otherform.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tmLicense as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works providedthat- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm     License.  You must require such a user to return or     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of     Project Gutenberg-tm works.- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days     of receipt of the work.- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic work or group of works on different terms than are setforth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing fromboth the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and MichaelHart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact theFoundation as set forth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadpublic domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tmcollection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronicworks, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate orcorrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectualproperty infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, acomputer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read byyour equipment.1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Rightof Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from.  If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium withyour written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you withthe defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of arefund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entityproviding it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity toreceive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copyis also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without furtheropportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHERWARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TOWARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates thelaw of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall beinterpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted bythe applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of anyprovision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordancewith this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you door cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tmwork, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to anyProject Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tmProject Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computersincluding obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It existsbecause of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations frompeople in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm'sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection willremain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundationand how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary ArchiveFoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted athttp://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project GutenbergLiterary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extentpermitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scatteredthroughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, emailbusiness@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contactinformation can be found at the Foundation's web site and officialpage at http://pglaf.orgFor additional contact information:     Dr. Gregory B. Newby     Chief Executive and Director     gbnewby@pglaf.orgSection 4.  Information about Donations to the Project GutenbergLiterary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  ToSEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for anyparticular state visit http://pglaf.orgWhile we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donationmethods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including including checks, online payments and credit carddonations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donateSection 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronicworks.Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tmconcept of a library of electronic works that could be freely sharedwith anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed ProjectGutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarilykeep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:     http://www.gutenberg.netThis Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
